
    <h1>
      PART ONE
    </h1>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0001" id="link2HCH0001">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter I: The Bertolini
    </h2>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Signora had no business to do it,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, &ldquo;no business
      at all. She promised us south rooms with a view close together, instead of
      which here are north rooms, looking into a courtyard, and a long way
      apart. Oh, Lucy!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And a Cockney, besides!&rdquo; said Lucy, who had been further saddened by the
      Signora&rsquo;s unexpected accent. &ldquo;It might be London.&rdquo; She looked at the two
      rows of English people who were sitting at the table; at the row of white
      bottles of water and red bottles of wine that ran between the English
      people; at the portraits of the late Queen and the late Poet Laureate that
      hung behind the English people, heavily framed; at the notice of the
      English church (Rev. Cuthbert Eager, M. A. Oxon.), that was the only other
      decoration of the wall. &ldquo;Charlotte, don&rsquo;t you feel, too, that we might be
      in London? I can hardly believe that all kinds of other things are just
      outside. I suppose it is one&rsquo;s being so tired.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This meat has surely been used for soup,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, laying down
      her fork.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want so to see the Arno. The rooms the Signora promised us in her
      letter would have looked over the Arno. The Signora had no business to do
      it at all. Oh, it is a shame!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Any nook does for me,&rdquo; Miss Bartlett continued; &ldquo;but it does seem hard
      that you shouldn&rsquo;t have a view.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy felt that she had been selfish. &ldquo;Charlotte, you mustn&rsquo;t spoil me: of
      course, you must look over the Arno, too. I meant that. The first vacant
      room in the front&mdash;&rdquo; &ldquo;You must have it,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, part of
      whose travelling expenses were paid by Lucy&rsquo;s mother&mdash;a piece of
      generosity to which she made many a tactful allusion.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, no. You must have it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I insist on it. Your mother would never forgive me, Lucy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She would never forgive me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The ladies&rsquo; voices grew animated, and&mdash;if the sad truth be owned&mdash;a
      little peevish. They were tired, and under the guise of unselfishness they
      wrangled. Some of their neighbours interchanged glances, and one of them&mdash;one
      of the ill-bred people whom one does meet abroad&mdash;leant forward over
      the table and actually intruded into their argument. He said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have a view, I have a view.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett was startled. Generally at a pension people looked them over
      for a day or two before speaking, and often did not find out that they
      would &ldquo;do&rdquo; till they had gone. She knew that the intruder was ill-bred,
      even before she glanced at him. He was an old man, of heavy build, with a
      fair, shaven face and large eyes. There was something childish in those
      eyes, though it was not the childishness of senility. What exactly it was
      Miss Bartlett did not stop to consider, for her glance passed on to his
      clothes. These did not attract her. He was probably trying to become
      acquainted with them before they got into the swim. So she assumed a dazed
      expression when he spoke to her, and then said: &ldquo;A view? Oh, a view! How
      delightful a view is!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This is my son,&rdquo; said the old man; &ldquo;his name&rsquo;s George. He has a view
      too.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, repressing Lucy, who was about to speak.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What I mean,&rdquo; he continued, &ldquo;is that you can have our rooms, and we&rsquo;ll
      have yours. We&rsquo;ll change.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The better class of tourist was shocked at this, and sympathized with the
      new-comers. Miss Bartlett, in reply, opened her mouth as little as
      possible, and said &ldquo;Thank you very much indeed; that is out of the
      question.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why?&rdquo; said the old man, with both fists on the table.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because it is quite out of the question, thank you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You see, we don&rsquo;t like to take&mdash;&rdquo; began Lucy. Her cousin again
      repressed her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But why?&rdquo; he persisted. &ldquo;Women like looking at a view; men don&rsquo;t.&rdquo; And he
      thumped with his fists like a naughty child, and turned to his son,
      saying, &ldquo;George, persuade them!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s so obvious they should have the rooms,&rdquo; said the son. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s
      nothing else to say.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He did not look at the ladies as he spoke, but his voice was perplexed and
      sorrowful. Lucy, too, was perplexed; but she saw that they were in for
      what is known as &ldquo;quite a scene,&rdquo; and she had an odd feeling that whenever
      these ill-bred tourists spoke the contest widened and deepened till it
      dealt, not with rooms and views, but with&mdash;well, with something quite
      different, whose existence she had not realized before. Now the old man
      attacked Miss Bartlett almost violently: Why should she not change? What
      possible objection had she? They would clear out in half an hour.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett, though skilled in the delicacies of conversation, was
      powerless in the presence of brutality. It was impossible to snub any one
      so gross. Her face reddened with displeasure. She looked around as much as
      to say, &ldquo;Are you all like this?&rdquo; And two little old ladies, who were
      sitting further up the table, with shawls hanging over the backs of the
      chairs, looked back, clearly indicating &ldquo;We are not; we are genteel.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eat your dinner, dear,&rdquo; she said to Lucy, and began to toy again with the
      meat that she had once censured.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy mumbled that those seemed very odd people opposite.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eat your dinner, dear. This pension is a failure. To-morrow we will make
      a change.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Hardly had she announced this fell decision when she reversed it. The
      curtains at the end of the room parted, and revealed a clergyman, stout
      but attractive, who hurried forward to take his place at the table,
      cheerfully apologizing for his lateness. Lucy, who had not yet acquired
      decency, at once rose to her feet, exclaiming: &ldquo;Oh, oh! Why, it&rsquo;s Mr.
      Beebe! Oh, how perfectly lovely! Oh, Charlotte, we must stop now, however
      bad the rooms are. Oh!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett said, with more restraint:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you do, Mr. Beebe? I expect that you have forgotten us: Miss
      Bartlett and Miss Honeychurch, who were at Tunbridge Wells when you helped
      the Vicar of St. Peter&rsquo;s that very cold Easter.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The clergyman, who had the air of one on a holiday, did not remember the
      ladies quite as clearly as they remembered him. But he came forward
      pleasantly enough and accepted the chair into which he was beckoned by
      Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I AM so glad to see you,&rdquo; said the girl, who was in a state of spiritual
      starvation, and would have been glad to see the waiter if her cousin had
      permitted it. &ldquo;Just fancy how small the world is. Summer Street, too,
      makes it so specially funny.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Honeychurch lives in the parish of Summer Street,&rdquo; said Miss
      Bartlett, filling up the gap, &ldquo;and she happened to tell me in the course
      of conversation that you have just accepted the living&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I heard from mother so last week. She didn&rsquo;t know that I knew you at
      Tunbridge Wells; but I wrote back at once, and I said: &lsquo;Mr. Beebe is&mdash;&lsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Quite right,&rdquo; said the clergyman. &ldquo;I move into the Rectory at Summer
      Street next June. I am lucky to be appointed to such a charming
      neighbourhood.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, how glad I am! The name of our house is Windy Corner.&rdquo; Mr. Beebe
      bowed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is mother and me generally, and my brother, though it&rsquo;s not often
      we get him to ch&mdash;&mdash; The church is rather far off, I mean.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy, dearest, let Mr. Beebe eat his dinner.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am eating it, thank you, and enjoying it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He preferred to talk to Lucy, whose playing he remembered, rather than to
      Miss Bartlett, who probably remembered his sermons. He asked the girl
      whether she knew Florence well, and was informed at some length that she
      had never been there before. It is delightful to advise a newcomer, and he
      was first in the field. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t neglect the country round,&rdquo; his advice
      concluded. &ldquo;The first fine afternoon drive up to Fiesole, and round by
      Settignano, or something of that sort.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No!&rdquo; cried a voice from the top of the table. &ldquo;Mr. Beebe, you are wrong.
      The first fine afternoon your ladies must go to Prato.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That lady looks so clever,&rdquo; whispered Miss Bartlett to her cousin. &ldquo;We
      are in luck.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And, indeed, a perfect torrent of information burst on them. People told
      them what to see, when to see it, how to stop the electric trams, how to
      get rid of the beggars, how much to give for a vellum blotter, how much
      the place would grow upon them. The Pension Bertolini had decided, almost
      enthusiastically, that they would do. Whichever way they looked, kind
      ladies smiled and shouted at them. And above all rose the voice of the
      clever lady, crying: &ldquo;Prato! They must go to Prato. That place is too
      sweetly squalid for words. I love it; I revel in shaking off the trammels
      of respectability, as you know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The young man named George glanced at the clever lady, and then returned
      moodily to his plate. Obviously he and his father did not do. Lucy, in the
      midst of her success, found time to wish they did. It gave her no extra
      pleasure that any one should be left in the cold; and when she rose to go,
      she turned back and gave the two outsiders a nervous little bow.
    </p>
    <p>
      The father did not see it; the son acknowledged it, not by another bow,
      but by raising his eyebrows and smiling; he seemed to be smiling across
      something.
    </p>
    <p>
      She hastened after her cousin, who had already disappeared through the
      curtains&mdash;curtains which smote one in the face, and seemed heavy with
      more than cloth. Beyond them stood the unreliable Signora, bowing
      good-evening to her guests, and supported by &lsquo;Enery, her little boy, and
      Victorier, her daughter. It made a curious little scene, this attempt of
      the Cockney to convey the grace and geniality of the South. And even more
      curious was the drawing-room, which attempted to rival the solid comfort
      of a Bloomsbury boarding-house. Was this really Italy?
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett was already seated on a tightly stuffed arm-chair, which had
      the colour and the contours of a tomato. She was talking to Mr. Beebe, and
      as she spoke, her long narrow head drove backwards and forwards, slowly,
      regularly, as though she were demolishing some invisible obstacle. &ldquo;We are
      most grateful to you,&rdquo; she was saying. &ldquo;The first evening means so much.
      When you arrived we were in for a peculiarly mauvais quart d&rsquo;heure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He expressed his regret.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you, by any chance, know the name of an old man who sat opposite us at
      dinner?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Emerson.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is he a friend of yours?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We are friendly&mdash;as one is in pensions.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then I will say no more.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He pressed her very slightly, and she said more.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am, as it were,&rdquo; she concluded, &ldquo;the chaperon of my young cousin, Lucy,
      and it would be a serious thing if I put her under an obligation to people
      of whom we know nothing. His manner was somewhat unfortunate. I hope I
      acted for the best.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You acted very naturally,&rdquo; said he. He seemed thoughtful, and after a few
      moments added: &ldquo;All the same, I don&rsquo;t think much harm would have come of
      accepting.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No harm, of course. But we could not be under an obligation.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He is rather a peculiar man.&rdquo; Again he hesitated, and then said gently:
      &ldquo;I think he would not take advantage of your acceptance, nor expect you to
      show gratitude. He has the merit&mdash;if it is one&mdash;of saying
      exactly what he means. He has rooms he does not value, and he thinks you
      would value them. He no more thought of putting you under an obligation
      than he thought of being polite. It is so difficult&mdash;at least, I find
      it difficult&mdash;to understand people who speak the truth.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy was pleased, and said: &ldquo;I was hoping that he was nice; I do so always
      hope that people will be nice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think he is; nice and tiresome. I differ from him on almost every point
      of any importance, and so, I expect&mdash;I may say I hope&mdash;you will
      differ. But his is a type one disagrees with rather than deplores. When he
      first came here he not unnaturally put people&rsquo;s backs up. He has no tact
      and no manners&mdash;I don&rsquo;t mean by that that he has bad manners&mdash;and
      he will not keep his opinions to himself. We nearly complained about him
      to our depressing Signora, but I am glad to say we thought better of it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Am I to conclude,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, &ldquo;that he is a Socialist?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe accepted the convenient word, not without a slight twitching of
      the lips.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And presumably he has brought up his son to be a Socialist, too?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hardly know George, for he hasn&rsquo;t learnt to talk yet. He seems a nice
      creature, and I think he has brains. Of course, he has all his father&rsquo;s
      mannerisms, and it is quite possible that he, too, may be a Socialist.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, you relieve me,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett. &ldquo;So you think I ought to have
      accepted their offer? You feel I have been narrow-minded and suspicious?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not at all,&rdquo; he answered; &ldquo;I never suggested that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But ought I not to apologize, at all events, for my apparent rudeness?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He replied, with some irritation, that it would be quite unnecessary, and
      got up from his seat to go to the smoking-room.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Was I a bore?&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, as soon as he had disappeared. &ldquo;Why
      didn&rsquo;t you talk, Lucy? He prefers young people, I&rsquo;m sure. I do hope I
      haven&rsquo;t monopolized him. I hoped you would have him all the evening, as
      well as all dinner-time.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He is nice,&rdquo; exclaimed Lucy. &ldquo;Just what I remember. He seems to see good
      in everyone. No one would take him for a clergyman.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear Lucia&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, you know what I mean. And you know how clergymen generally laugh;
      Mr. Beebe laughs just like an ordinary man.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Funny girl! How you do remind me of your mother. I wonder if she will
      approve of Mr. Beebe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure she will; and so will Freddy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think everyone at Windy Corner will approve; it is the fashionable
      world. I am used to Tunbridge Wells, where we are all hopelessly behind
      the times.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; said Lucy despondently.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a haze of disapproval in the air, but whether the disapproval
      was of herself, or of Mr. Beebe, or of the fashionable world at Windy
      Corner, or of the narrow world at Tunbridge Wells, she could not
      determine. She tried to locate it, but as usual she blundered. Miss
      Bartlett sedulously denied disapproving of any one, and added &ldquo;I am afraid
      you are finding me a very depressing companion.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And the girl again thought: &ldquo;I must have been selfish or unkind; I must be
      more careful. It is so dreadful for Charlotte, being poor.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Fortunately one of the little old ladies, who for some time had been
      smiling very benignly, now approached and asked if she might be allowed to
      sit where Mr. Beebe had sat. Permission granted, she began to chatter
      gently about Italy, the plunge it had been to come there, the gratifying
      success of the plunge, the improvement in her sister&rsquo;s health, the
      necessity of closing the bed-room windows at night, and of thoroughly
      emptying the water-bottles in the morning. She handled her subjects
      agreeably, and they were, perhaps, more worthy of attention than the high
      discourse upon Guelfs and Ghibellines which was proceeding tempestuously
      at the other end of the room. It was a real catastrophe, not a mere
      episode, that evening of hers at Venice, when she had found in her bedroom
      something that is one worse than a flea, though one better than something
      else.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But here you are as safe as in England. Signora Bertolini is so English.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yet our rooms smell,&rdquo; said poor Lucy. &ldquo;We dread going to bed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, then you look into the court.&rdquo; She sighed. &ldquo;If only Mr. Emerson was
      more tactful! We were so sorry for you at dinner.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think he was meaning to be kind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Undoubtedly he was,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Beebe has just been scolding me for my suspicious nature. Of course,
      I was holding back on my cousin&rsquo;s account.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course,&rdquo; said the little old lady; and they murmured that one could
      not be too careful with a young girl.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy tried to look demure, but could not help feeling a great fool. No one
      was careful with her at home; or, at all events, she had not noticed it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;About old Mr. Emerson&mdash;I hardly know. No, he is not tactful; yet,
      have you ever noticed that there are people who do things which are most
      indelicate, and yet at the same time&mdash;beautiful?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Beautiful?&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, puzzled at the word. &ldquo;Are not beauty and
      delicacy the same?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So one would have thought,&rdquo; said the other helplessly. &ldquo;But things are so
      difficult, I sometimes think.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She proceeded no further into things, for Mr. Beebe reappeared, looking
      extremely pleasant.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Bartlett,&rdquo; he cried, &ldquo;it&rsquo;s all right about the rooms. I&rsquo;m so glad.
      Mr. Emerson was talking about it in the smoking-room, and knowing what I
      did, I encouraged him to make the offer again. He has let me come and ask
      you. He would be so pleased.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Charlotte,&rdquo; cried Lucy to her cousin, &ldquo;we must have the rooms now.
      The old man is just as nice and kind as he can be.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett was silent.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I fear,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe, after a pause, &ldquo;that I have been officious. I
      must apologize for my interference.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Gravely displeased, he turned to go. Not till then did Miss Bartlett
      reply: &ldquo;My own wishes, dearest Lucy, are unimportant in comparison with
      yours. It would be hard indeed if I stopped you doing as you liked at
      Florence, when I am only here through your kindness. If you wish me to
      turn these gentlemen out of their rooms, I will do it. Would you then, Mr.
      Beebe, kindly tell Mr. Emerson that I accept his kind offer, and then
      conduct him to me, in order that I may thank him personally?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She raised her voice as she spoke; it was heard all over the drawing-room,
      and silenced the Guelfs and the Ghibellines. The clergyman, inwardly
      cursing the female sex, bowed, and departed with her message.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Remember, Lucy, I alone am implicated in this. I do not wish the
      acceptance to come from you. Grant me that, at all events.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe was back, saying rather nervously:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Emerson is engaged, but here is his son instead.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The young man gazed down on the three ladies, who felt seated on the
      floor, so low were their chairs.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My father,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;is in his bath, so you cannot thank him personally.
      But any message given by you to me will be given by me to him as soon as
      he comes out.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett was unequal to the bath. All her barbed civilities came
      forth wrong end first. Young Mr. Emerson scored a notable triumph to the
      delight of Mr. Beebe and to the secret delight of Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Poor young man!&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, as soon as he had gone.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How angry he is with his father about the rooms! It is all he can do to
      keep polite.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In half an hour or so your rooms will be ready,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe. Then
      looking rather thoughtfully at the two cousins, he retired to his own
      rooms, to write up his philosophic diary.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, dear!&rdquo; breathed the little old lady, and shuddered as if all the
      winds of heaven had entered the apartment. &ldquo;Gentlemen sometimes do not
      realize&mdash;&rdquo; Her voice faded away, but Miss Bartlett seemed to
      understand and a conversation developed, in which gentlemen who did not
      thoroughly realize played a principal part. Lucy, not realizing either,
      was reduced to literature. Taking up Baedeker&rsquo;s Handbook to Northern
      Italy, she committed to memory the most important dates of Florentine
      History. For she was determined to enjoy herself on the morrow. Thus the
      half-hour crept profitably away, and at last Miss Bartlett rose with a
      sigh, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think one might venture now. No, Lucy, do not stir. I will superintend
      the move.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How you do do everything,&rdquo; said Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Naturally, dear. It is my affair.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I would like to help you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, dear.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Charlotte&rsquo;s energy! And her unselfishness! She had been thus all her life,
      but really, on this Italian tour, she was surpassing herself. So Lucy
      felt, or strove to feel. And yet&mdash;there was a rebellious spirit in
      her which wondered whether the acceptance might not have been less
      delicate and more beautiful. At all events, she entered her own room
      without any feeling of joy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want to explain,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, &ldquo;why it is that I have taken the
      largest room. Naturally, of course, I should have given it to you; but I
      happen to know that it belongs to the young man, and I was sure your
      mother would not like it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy was bewildered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you are to accept a favour it is more suitable you should be under an
      obligation to his father than to him. I am a woman of the world, in my
      small way, and I know where things lead to. However, Mr. Beebe is a
      guarantee of a sort that they will not presume on this.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mother wouldn&rsquo;t mind I&rsquo;m sure,&rdquo; said Lucy, but again had the sense of
      larger and unsuspected issues.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett only sighed, and enveloped her in a protecting embrace as
      she wished her good-night. It gave Lucy the sensation of a fog, and when
      she reached her own room she opened the window and breathed the clean
      night air, thinking of the kind old man who had enabled her to see the
      lights dancing in the Arno and the cypresses of San Miniato, and the
      foot-hills of the Apennines, black against the rising moon.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett, in her room, fastened the window-shutters and locked the
      door, and then made a tour of the apartment to see where the cupboards
      led, and whether there were any oubliettes or secret entrances. It was
      then that she saw, pinned up over the washstand, a sheet of paper on which
      was scrawled an enormous note of interrogation. Nothing more.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What does it mean?&rdquo; she thought, and she examined it carefully by the
      light of a candle. Meaningless at first, it gradually became menacing,
      obnoxious, portentous with evil. She was seized with an impulse to destroy
      it, but fortunately remembered that she had no right to do so, since it
      must be the property of young Mr. Emerson. So she unpinned it carefully,
      and put it between two pieces of blotting-paper to keep it clean for him.
      Then she completed her inspection of the room, sighed heavily according to
      her habit, and went to bed.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0002" id="link2HCH0002">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter II: In Santa Croce with No Baedeker
    </h2>
    <p>
      It was pleasant to wake up in Florence, to open the eyes upon a bright
      bare room, with a floor of red tiles which look clean though they are not;
      with a painted ceiling whereon pink griffins and blue amorini sport in a
      forest of yellow violins and bassoons. It was pleasant, too, to fling wide
      the windows, pinching the fingers in unfamiliar fastenings, to lean out
      into sunshine with beautiful hills and trees and marble churches opposite,
      and close below, the Arno, gurgling against the embankment of the road.
    </p>
    <p>
      Over the river men were at work with spades and sieves on the sandy
      foreshore, and on the river was a boat, also diligently employed for some
      mysterious end. An electric tram came rushing underneath the window. No
      one was inside it, except one tourist; but its platforms were overflowing
      with Italians, who preferred to stand. Children tried to hang on behind,
      and the conductor, with no malice, spat in their faces to make them let
      go. Then soldiers appeared&mdash;good-looking, undersized men&mdash;wearing
      each a knapsack covered with mangy fur, and a great-coat which had been
      cut for some larger soldier. Beside them walked officers, looking foolish
      and fierce, and before them went little boys, turning somersaults in time
      with the band. The tramcar became entangled in their ranks, and moved on
      painfully, like a caterpillar in a swarm of ants. One of the little boys
      fell down, and some white bullocks came out of an archway. Indeed, if it
      had not been for the good advice of an old man who was selling
      button-hooks, the road might never have got clear.
    </p>
    <p>
      Over such trivialities as these many a valuable hour may slip away, and
      the traveller who has gone to Italy to study the tactile values of Giotto,
      or the corruption of the Papacy, may return remembering nothing but the
      blue sky and the men and women who live under it. So it was as well that
      Miss Bartlett should tap and come in, and having commented on Lucy&rsquo;s
      leaving the door unlocked, and on her leaning out of the window before she
      was fully dressed, should urge her to hasten herself, or the best of the
      day would be gone. By the time Lucy was ready her cousin had done her
      breakfast, and was listening to the clever lady among the crumbs.
    </p>
    <p>
      A conversation then ensued, on not unfamiliar lines. Miss Bartlett was,
      after all, a wee bit tired, and thought they had better spend the morning
      settling in; unless Lucy would at all like to go out? Lucy would rather
      like to go out, as it was her first day in Florence, but, of course, she
      could go alone. Miss Bartlett could not allow this. Of course she would
      accompany Lucy everywhere. Oh, certainly not; Lucy would stop with her
      cousin. Oh, no! that would never do. Oh, yes!
    </p>
    <p>
      At this point the clever lady broke in.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If it is Mrs. Grundy who is troubling you, I do assure you that you can
      neglect the good person. Being English, Miss Honeychurch will be perfectly
      safe. Italians understand. A dear friend of mine, Contessa Baroncelli, has
      two daughters, and when she cannot send a maid to school with them, she
      lets them go in sailor-hats instead. Every one takes them for English, you
      see, especially if their hair is strained tightly behind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett was unconvinced by the safety of Contessa Baroncelli&rsquo;s
      daughters. She was determined to take Lucy herself, her head not being so
      very bad. The clever lady then said that she was going to spend a long
      morning in Santa Croce, and if Lucy would come too, she would be
      delighted.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I will take you by a dear dirty back way, Miss Honeychurch, and if you
      bring me luck, we shall have an adventure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy said that this was most kind, and at once opened the Baedeker, to see
      where Santa Croce was.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Tut, tut! Miss Lucy! I hope we shall soon emancipate you from Baedeker.
      He does but touch the surface of things. As to the true Italy&mdash;he
      does not even dream of it. The true Italy is only to be found by patient
      observation.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      This sounded very interesting, and Lucy hurried over her breakfast, and
      started with her new friend in high spirits. Italy was coming at last. The
      Cockney Signora and her works had vanished like a bad dream.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Lavish&mdash;for that was the clever lady&rsquo;s name&mdash;turned to the
      right along the sunny Lung&rsquo; Arno. How delightfully warm! But a wind down
      the side streets cut like a knife, didn&rsquo;t it? Ponte alle Grazie&mdash;particularly
      interesting, mentioned by Dante. San Miniato&mdash;beautiful as well as
      interesting; the crucifix that kissed a murderer&mdash;Miss Honeychurch
      would remember the story. The men on the river were fishing. (Untrue; but
      then, so is most information.) Then Miss Lavish darted under the archway
      of the white bullocks, and she stopped, and she cried:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A smell! a true Florentine smell! Every city, let me teach you, has its
      own smell.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is it a very nice smell?&rdquo; said Lucy, who had inherited from her mother a
      distaste to dirt.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;One doesn&rsquo;t come to Italy for niceness,&rdquo; was the retort; &ldquo;one comes for
      life. Buon giorno! Buon giorno!&rdquo; bowing right and left. &ldquo;Look at that
      adorable wine-cart! How the driver stares at us, dear, simple soul!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      So Miss Lavish proceeded through the streets of the city of Florence,
      short, fidgety, and playful as a kitten, though without a kitten&rsquo;s grace.
      It was a treat for the girl to be with any one so clever and so cheerful;
      and a blue military cloak, such as an Italian officer wears, only
      increased the sense of festivity.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Buon giorno! Take the word of an old woman, Miss Lucy: you will never
      repent of a little civility to your inferiors. That is the true democracy.
      Though I am a real Radical as well. There, now you&rsquo;re shocked.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Indeed, I&rsquo;m not!&rdquo; exclaimed Lucy. &ldquo;We are Radicals, too, out and out. My
      father always voted for Mr. Gladstone, until he was so dreadful about
      Ireland.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I see, I see. And now you have gone over to the enemy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, please&mdash;! If my father was alive, I am sure he would vote
      Radical again now that Ireland is all right. And as it is, the glass over
      our front door was broken last election, and Freddy is sure it was the
      Tories; but mother says nonsense, a tramp.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Shameful! A manufacturing district, I suppose?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;in the Surrey hills. About five miles from Dorking, looking over
      the Weald.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Lavish seemed interested, and slackened her trot.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What a delightful part; I know it so well. It is full of the very nicest
      people. Do you know Sir Harry Otway&mdash;a Radical if ever there was?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well indeed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And old Mrs. Butterworth the philanthropist?&rdquo;
 </p>
    <p>
&ldquo;Why, she rents a field of us! How funny!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Lavish looked at the narrow ribbon of sky, and murmured: &ldquo;Oh, you
      have property in Surrey?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hardly any,&rdquo; said Lucy, fearful of being thought a snob. &ldquo;Only thirty
      acres&mdash;just the garden, all downhill, and some fields.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Lavish was not disgusted, and said it was just the size of her aunt&rsquo;s
      Suffolk estate. Italy receded. They tried to remember the last name of
      Lady Louisa someone, who had taken a house near Summer Street the other
      year, but she had not liked it, which was odd of her. And just as Miss
      Lavish had got the name, she broke off and exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Bless us! Bless us and save us! We&rsquo;ve lost the way.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Certainly they had seemed a long time in reaching Santa Croce, the tower
      of which had been plainly visible from the landing window. But Miss Lavish
      had said so much about knowing her Florence by heart, that Lucy had
      followed her with no misgivings.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lost! lost! My dear Miss Lucy, during our political diatribes we have
      taken a wrong turning. How those horrid Conservatives would jeer at us!
      What are we to do? Two lone females in an unknown town. Now, this is what
      I call an adventure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy, who wanted to see Santa Croce, suggested, as a possible solution,
      that they should ask the way there.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, but that is the word of a craven! And no, you are not, not, NOT to
      look at your Baedeker. Give it to me; I shan&rsquo;t let you carry it. We will
      simply drift.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Accordingly they drifted through a series of those grey-brown streets,
      neither commodious nor picturesque, in which the eastern quarter of the
      city abounds. Lucy soon lost interest in the discontent of Lady Louisa,
      and became discontented herself. For one ravishing moment Italy appeared.
      She stood in the Square of the Annunziata and saw in the living
      terra-cotta those divine babies whom no cheap reproduction can ever stale.
      There they stood, with their shining limbs bursting from the garments of
      charity, and their strong white arms extended against circlets of heaven.
      Lucy thought she had never seen anything more beautiful; but Miss Lavish,
      with a shriek of dismay, dragged her forward, declaring that they were out
      of their path now by at least a mile.
    </p>
    <p>
      The hour was approaching at which the continental breakfast begins, or
      rather ceases, to tell, and the ladies bought some hot chestnut paste out
      of a little shop, because it looked so typical. It tasted partly of the
      paper in which it was wrapped, partly of hair oil, partly of the great
      unknown. But it gave them strength to drift into another Piazza, large and
      dusty, on the farther side of which rose a black-and-white facade of
      surpassing ugliness. Miss Lavish spoke to it dramatically. It was Santa
      Croce. The adventure was over.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Stop a minute; let those two people go on, or I shall have to speak to
      them. I do detest conventional intercourse. Nasty! they are going into the
      church, too. Oh, the Britisher abroad!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We sat opposite them at dinner last night. They have given us their
      rooms. They were so very kind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Look at their figures!&rdquo; laughed Miss Lavish. &ldquo;They walk through my Italy
      like a pair of cows. It&rsquo;s very naughty of me, but I would like to set an
      examination paper at Dover, and turn back every tourist who couldn&rsquo;t pass
      it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What would you ask us?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Lavish laid her hand pleasantly on Lucy&rsquo;s arm, as if to suggest that
      she, at all events, would get full marks. In this exalted mood they
      reached the steps of the great church, and were about to enter it when
      Miss Lavish stopped, squeaked, flung up her arms, and cried:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There goes my local-colour box! I must have a word with him!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And in a moment she was away over the Piazza, her military cloak flapping
      in the wind; nor did she slacken speed till she caught up an old man with
      white whiskers, and nipped him playfully upon the arm.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy waited for nearly ten minutes. Then she began to get tired. The
      beggars worried her, the dust blew in her eyes, and she remembered that a
      young girl ought not to loiter in public places. She descended slowly into
      the Piazza with the intention of rejoining Miss Lavish, who was really
      almost too original. But at that moment Miss Lavish and her local-colour
      box moved also, and disappeared down a side street, both gesticulating
      largely. Tears of indignation came to Lucy&rsquo;s eyes partly because Miss
      Lavish had jilted her, partly because she had taken her Baedeker. How
      could she find her way home? How could she find her way about in Santa
      Croce? Her first morning was ruined, and she might never be in Florence
      again. A few minutes ago she had been all high spirits, talking as a woman
      of culture, and half persuading herself that she was full of originality.
      Now she entered the church depressed and humiliated, not even able to
      remember whether it was built by the Franciscans or the Dominicans. Of
      course, it must be a wonderful building. But how like a barn! And how very
      cold! Of course, it contained frescoes by Giotto, in the presence of whose
      tactile values she was capable of feeling what was proper. But who was to
      tell her which they were? She walked about disdainfully, unwilling to be
      enthusiastic over monuments of uncertain authorship or date. There was no
      one even to tell her which, of all the sepulchral slabs that paved the
      nave and transepts, was the one that was really beautiful, the one that
      had been most praised by Mr. Ruskin.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then the pernicious charm of Italy worked on her, and, instead of
      acquiring information, she began to be happy. She puzzled out the Italian
      notices&mdash;the notices that forbade people to introduce dogs into the
      church&mdash;the notice that prayed people, in the interest of health and
      out of respect to the sacred edifice in which they found themselves, not
      to spit. She watched the tourists; their noses were as red as their
      Baedekers, so cold was Santa Croce. She beheld the horrible fate that
      overtook three Papists&mdash;two he-babies and a she-baby&mdash;who began
      their career by sousing each other with the Holy Water, and then proceeded
      to the Machiavelli memorial, dripping but hallowed. Advancing towards it
      very slowly and from immense distances, they touched the stone with their
      fingers, with their handkerchiefs, with their heads, and then retreated.
      What could this mean? They did it again and again. Then Lucy realized that
      they had mistaken Machiavelli for some saint, hoping to acquire virtue.
      Punishment followed quickly. The smallest he-baby stumbled over one of the
      sepulchral slabs so much admired by Mr. Ruskin, and entangled his feet in
      the features of a recumbent bishop. Protestant as she was, Lucy darted
      forward. She was too late. He fell heavily upon the prelate&rsquo;s upturned
      toes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hateful bishop!&rdquo; exclaimed the voice of old Mr. Emerson, who had darted
      forward also. &ldquo;Hard in life, hard in death. Go out into the sunshine,
      little boy, and kiss your hand to the sun, for that is where you ought to
      be. Intolerable bishop!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The child screamed frantically at these words, and at these dreadful
      people who picked him up, dusted him, rubbed his bruises, and told him not
      to be superstitious.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Look at him!&rdquo; said Mr. Emerson to Lucy. &ldquo;Here&rsquo;s a mess: a baby hurt,
      cold, and frightened! But what else can you expect from a church?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The child&rsquo;s legs had become as melting wax. Each time that old Mr. Emerson
      and Lucy set it erect it collapsed with a roar. Fortunately an Italian
      lady, who ought to have been saying her prayers, came to the rescue. By
      some mysterious virtue, which mothers alone possess, she stiffened the
      little boy&rsquo;s back-bone and imparted strength to his knees. He stood. Still
      gibbering with agitation, he walked away.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are a clever woman,&rdquo; said Mr. Emerson. &ldquo;You have done more than all
      the relics in the world. I am not of your creed, but I do believe in those
      who make their fellow-creatures happy. There is no scheme of the universe&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He paused for a phrase.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Niente,&rdquo; said the Italian lady, and returned to her prayers.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not sure she understands English,&rdquo; suggested Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      In her chastened mood she no longer despised the Emersons. She was
      determined to be gracious to them, beautiful rather than delicate, and, if
      possible, to erase Miss Bartlett&rsquo;s civility by some gracious reference to
      the pleasant rooms.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That woman understands everything,&rdquo; was Mr. Emerson&rsquo;s reply. &ldquo;But what
      are you doing here? Are you doing the church? Are you through with the
      church?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; cried Lucy, remembering her grievance. &ldquo;I came here with Miss
      Lavish, who was to explain everything; and just by the door&mdash;it is
      too bad!&mdash;she simply ran away, and after waiting quite a time, I had
      to come in by myself.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why shouldn&rsquo;t you?&rdquo; said Mr. Emerson.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, why shouldn&rsquo;t you come by yourself?&rdquo; said the son, addressing the
      young lady for the first time.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But Miss Lavish has even taken away Baedeker.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Baedeker?&rdquo; said Mr. Emerson. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m glad it&rsquo;s THAT you minded. It&rsquo;s worth
      minding, the loss of a Baedeker. THAT&rsquo;S worth minding.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy was puzzled. She was again conscious of some new idea, and was not
      sure whither it would lead her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you&rsquo;ve no Baedeker,&rdquo; said the son, &ldquo;you&rsquo;d better join us.&rdquo; Was this
      where the idea would lead? She took refuge in her dignity.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Thank you very much, but I could not think of that. I hope you do not
      suppose that I came to join on to you. I really came to help with the
      child, and to thank you for so kindly giving us your rooms last night. I
      hope that you have not been put to any great inconvenience.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear,&rdquo; said the old man gently, &ldquo;I think that you are repeating what
      you have heard older people say. You are pretending to be touchy; but you
      are not really. Stop being so tiresome, and tell me instead what part of
      the church you want to see. To take you to it will be a real pleasure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Now, this was abominably impertinent, and she ought to have been furious.
      But it is sometimes as difficult to lose one&rsquo;s temper as it is difficult
      at other times to keep it. Lucy could not get cross. Mr. Emerson was an
      old man, and surely a girl might humour him. On the other hand, his son
      was a young man, and she felt that a girl ought to be offended with him,
      or at all events be offended before him. It was at him that she gazed
      before replying.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am not touchy, I hope. It is the Giottos that I want to see, if you
      will kindly tell me which they are.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The son nodded. With a look of sombre satisfaction, he led the way to the
      Peruzzi Chapel. There was a hint of the teacher about him. She felt like a
      child in school who had answered a question rightly.
    </p>
    <p>
      The chapel was already filled with an earnest congregation, and out of
      them rose the voice of a lecturer, directing them how to worship Giotto,
      not by tactful valuations, but by the standards of the spirit.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Remember,&rdquo; he was saying, &ldquo;the facts about this church of Santa Croce;
      how it was built by faith in the full fervour of medievalism, before any
      taint of the Renaissance had appeared. Observe how Giotto in these
      frescoes&mdash;now, unhappily, ruined by restoration&mdash;is untroubled
      by the snares of anatomy and perspective. Could anything be more majestic,
      more pathetic, beautiful, true? How little, we feel, avails knowledge and
      technical cleverness against a man who truly feels!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No!&rdquo; exclaimed Mr. Emerson, in much too loud a voice for church.
      &ldquo;Remember nothing of the sort! Built by faith indeed! That simply means
      the workmen weren&rsquo;t paid properly. And as for the frescoes, I see no truth
      in them. Look at that fat man in blue! He must weigh as much as I do, and
      he is shooting into the sky like an air balloon.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He was referring to the fresco of the &ldquo;Ascension of St. John.&rdquo; Inside, the
      lecturer&rsquo;s voice faltered, as well it might. The audience shifted
      uneasily, and so did Lucy. She was sure that she ought not to be with
      these men; but they had cast a spell over her. They were so serious and so
      strange that she could not remember how to behave.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now, did this happen, or didn&rsquo;t it? Yes or no?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      George replied:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It happened like this, if it happened at all. I would rather go up to
      heaven by myself than be pushed by cherubs; and if I got there I should
      like my friends to lean out of it, just as they do here.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You will never go up,&rdquo; said his father. &ldquo;You and I, dear boy, will lie at
      peace in the earth that bore us, and our names will disappear as surely as
      our work survives.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Some of the people can only see the empty grave, not the saint, whoever
      he is, going up. It did happen like that, if it happened at all.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Pardon me,&rdquo; said a frigid voice. &ldquo;The chapel is somewhat small for two
      parties. We will incommode you no longer.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The lecturer was a clergyman, and his audience must be also his flock, for
      they held prayer-books as well as guide-books in their hands. They filed
      out of the chapel in silence. Amongst them were the two little old ladies
      of the Pension Bertolini&mdash;Miss Teresa and Miss Catherine Alan.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Stop!&rdquo; cried Mr. Emerson. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s plenty of room for us all. Stop!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The procession disappeared without a word.
    </p>
    <p>
      Soon the lecturer could be heard in the next chapel, describing the life
      of St. Francis.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;George, I do believe that clergyman is the Brixton curate.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      George went into the next chapel and returned, saying &ldquo;Perhaps he is. I
      don&rsquo;t remember.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then I had better speak to him and remind him who I am. It&rsquo;s that Mr.
      Eager. Why did he go? Did we talk too loud? How vexatious. I shall go and
      say we are sorry. Hadn&rsquo;t I better? Then perhaps he will come back.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He will not come back,&rdquo; said George.
    </p>
    <p>
      But Mr. Emerson, contrite and unhappy, hurried away to apologize to the
      Rev. Cuthbert Eager. Lucy, apparently absorbed in a lunette, could hear
      the lecture again interrupted, the anxious, aggressive voice of the old
      man, the curt, injured replies of his opponent. The son, who took every
      little contretemps as if it were a tragedy, was listening also.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My father has that effect on nearly everyone,&rdquo; he informed her. &ldquo;He will
      try to be kind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hope we all try,&rdquo; said she, smiling nervously.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because we think it improves our characters. But he is kind to people
      because he loves them; and they find him out, and are offended, or
      frightened.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How silly of them!&rdquo; said Lucy, though in her heart she sympathized; &ldquo;I
      think that a kind action done tactfully&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Tact!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He threw up his head in disdain. Apparently she had given the wrong
      answer. She watched the singular creature pace up and down the chapel. For
      a young man his face was rugged, and&mdash;until the shadows fell upon it&mdash;hard.
      Enshadowed, it sprang into tenderness. She saw him once again at Rome, on
      the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, carrying a burden of acorns. Healthy
      and muscular, he yet gave her the feeling of greyness, of tragedy that
      might only find solution in the night. The feeling soon passed; it was
      unlike her to have entertained anything so subtle. Born of silence and of
      unknown emotion, it passed when Mr. Emerson returned, and she could
      re-enter the world of rapid talk, which was alone familiar to her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Were you snubbed?&rdquo; asked his son tranquilly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But we have spoilt the pleasure of I don&rsquo;t know how many people. They
      won&rsquo;t come back.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;...full of innate sympathy...quickness to perceive good in
      others...vision of the brotherhood of man...&rdquo; Scraps of the lecture on St.
      Francis came floating round the partition wall.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t let us spoil yours,&rdquo; he continued to Lucy. &ldquo;Have you looked at
      those saints?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; said Lucy. &ldquo;They are lovely. Do you know which is the tombstone
      that is praised in Ruskin?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He did not know, and suggested that they should try to guess it. George,
      rather to her relief, refused to move, and she and the old man wandered
      not unpleasantly about Santa Croce, which, though it is like a barn, has
      harvested many beautiful things inside its walls. There were also beggars
      to avoid and guides to dodge round the pillars, and an old lady with her
      dog, and here and there a priest modestly edging to his Mass through the
      groups of tourists. But Mr. Emerson was only half interested. He watched
      the lecturer, whose success he believed he had impaired, and then he
      anxiously watched his son.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why will he look at that fresco?&rdquo; he said uneasily. &ldquo;I saw nothing in
      it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I like Giotto,&rdquo; she replied. &ldquo;It is so wonderful what they say about his
      tactile values. Though I like things like the Della Robbia babies better.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So you ought. A baby is worth a dozen saints. And my baby&rsquo;s worth the
      whole of Paradise, and as far as I can see he lives in Hell.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy again felt that this did not do.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In Hell,&rdquo; he repeated. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s unhappy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, dear!&rdquo; said Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How can he be unhappy when he is strong and alive? What more is one to
      give him? And think how he has been brought up&mdash;free from all the
      superstition and ignorance that lead men to hate one another in the name
      of God. With such an education as that, I thought he was bound to grow up
      happy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She was no theologian, but she felt that here was a very foolish old man,
      as well as a very irreligious one. She also felt that her mother might not
      like her talking to that kind of person, and that Charlotte would object
      most strongly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What are we to do with him?&rdquo; he asked. &ldquo;He comes out for his holiday to
      Italy, and behaves&mdash;like that; like the little child who ought to
      have been playing, and who hurt himself upon the tombstone. Eh? What did
      you say?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy had made no suggestion. Suddenly he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now don&rsquo;t be stupid over this. I don&rsquo;t require you to fall in love with
      my boy, but I do think you might try and understand him. You are nearer
      his age, and if you let yourself go I am sure you are sensible. You might
      help me. He has known so few women, and you have the time. You stop here
      several weeks, I suppose? But let yourself go. You are inclined to get
      muddled, if I may judge from last night. Let yourself go. Pull out from
      the depths those thoughts that you do not understand, and spread them out
      in the sunlight and know the meaning of them. By understanding George you
      may learn to understand yourself. It will be good for both of you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      To this extraordinary speech Lucy found no answer.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I only know what it is that&rsquo;s wrong with him; not why it is.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And what is it?&rdquo; asked Lucy fearfully, expecting some harrowing tale.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The old trouble; things won&rsquo;t fit.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What things?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The things of the universe. It is quite true. They don&rsquo;t.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Mr. Emerson, whatever do you mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      In his ordinary voice, so that she scarcely realized he was quoting
      poetry, he said:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  &ldquo;&lsquo;From far, from eve and morning,
   And yon twelve-winded sky,
   The stuff of life to knit me
   Blew hither: here am I&rsquo;
</pre>
    <p>
      George and I both know this, but why does it distress him? We know that we
      come from the winds, and that we shall return to them; that all life is
      perhaps a knot, a tangle, a blemish in the eternal smoothness. But why
      should this make us unhappy? Let us rather love one another, and work and
      rejoice. I don&rsquo;t believe in this world sorrow.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Honeychurch assented.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then make my boy think like us. Make him realize that by the side of the
      everlasting Why there is a Yes&mdash;a transitory Yes if you like, but a
      Yes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Suddenly she laughed; surely one ought to laugh. A young man melancholy
      because the universe wouldn&rsquo;t fit, because life was a tangle or a wind, or
      a Yes, or something!
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m very sorry,&rdquo; she cried. &ldquo;You&rsquo;ll think me unfeeling, but&mdash;but&mdash;&rdquo;
       Then she became matronly. &ldquo;Oh, but your son wants employment. Has he no
      particular hobby? Why, I myself have worries, but I can generally forget
      them at the piano; and collecting stamps did no end of good for my
      brother. Perhaps Italy bores him; you ought to try the Alps or the Lakes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The old man&rsquo;s face saddened, and he touched her gently with his hand. This
      did not alarm her; she thought that her advice had impressed him and that
      he was thanking her for it. Indeed, he no longer alarmed her at all; she
      regarded him as a kind thing, but quite silly. Her feelings were as
      inflated spiritually as they had been an hour ago esthetically, before she
      lost Baedeker. The dear George, now striding towards them over the
      tombstones, seemed both pitiable and absurd. He approached, his face in
      the shadow. He said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Bartlett.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, good gracious me!&rdquo; said Lucy, suddenly collapsing and again seeing
      the whole of life in a new perspective. &ldquo;Where? Where?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In the nave.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I see. Those gossiping little Miss Alans must have&mdash;&rdquo; She checked
      herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Poor girl!&rdquo; exploded Mr. Emerson. &ldquo;Poor girl!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She could not let this pass, for it was just what she was feeling herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Poor girl? I fail to understand the point of that remark. I think myself
      a very fortunate girl, I assure you. I&rsquo;m thoroughly happy, and having a
      splendid time. Pray don&rsquo;t waste time mourning over me. There&rsquo;s enough
      sorrow in the world, isn&rsquo;t there, without trying to invent it. Good-bye.
      Thank you both so much for all your kindness. Ah, yes! there does come my
      cousin. A delightful morning! Santa Croce is a wonderful church.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She joined her cousin.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0003" id="link2HCH0003">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter III: Music, Violets, and the Letter &ldquo;S&rdquo;
     </h2>
    <p>
      It so happened that Lucy, who found daily life rather chaotic, entered a
      more solid world when she opened the piano. She was then no longer either
      deferential or patronizing; no longer either a rebel or a slave. The
      kingdom of music is not the kingdom of this world; it will accept those
      whom breeding and intellect and culture have alike rejected. The
      commonplace person begins to play, and shoots into the empyrean without
      effort, whilst we look up, marvelling how he has escaped us, and thinking
      how we could worship him and love him, would he but translate his visions
      into human words, and his experiences into human actions. Perhaps he
      cannot; certainly he does not, or does so very seldom. Lucy had done so
      never.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was no dazzling executante; her runs were not at all like strings of
      pearls, and she struck no more right notes than was suitable for one of
      her age and situation. Nor was she the passionate young lady, who performs
      so tragically on a summer&rsquo;s evening with the window open. Passion was
      there, but it could not be easily labelled; it slipped between love and
      hatred and jealousy, and all the furniture of the pictorial style. And she
      was tragical only in the sense that she was great, for she loved to play
      on the side of Victory. Victory of what and over what&mdash;that is more
      than the words of daily life can tell us. But that some sonatas of
      Beethoven are written tragic no one can gainsay; yet they can triumph or
      despair as the player decides, and Lucy had decided that they should
      triumph.
    </p>
    <p>
      A very wet afternoon at the Bertolini permitted her to do the thing she
      really liked, and after lunch she opened the little draped piano. A few
      people lingered round and praised her playing, but finding that she made
      no reply, dispersed to their rooms to write up their diaries or to sleep.
      She took no notice of Mr. Emerson looking for his son, nor of Miss
      Bartlett looking for Miss Lavish, nor of Miss Lavish looking for her
      cigarette-case. Like every true performer, she was intoxicated by the mere
      feel of the notes: they were fingers caressing her own; and by touch, not
      by sound alone, did she come to her desire.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe, sitting unnoticed in the window, pondered this illogical
      element in Miss Honeychurch, and recalled the occasion at Tunbridge Wells
      when he had discovered it. It was at one of those entertainments where the
      upper classes entertain the lower. The seats were filled with a respectful
      audience, and the ladies and gentlemen of the parish, under the auspices
      of their vicar, sang, or recited, or imitated the drawing of a champagne
      cork. Among the promised items was &ldquo;Miss Honeychurch. Piano. Beethoven,&rdquo;
       and Mr. Beebe was wondering whether it would be Adelaida, or the march of
      The Ruins of Athens, when his composure was disturbed by the opening bars
      of Opus III. He was in suspense all through the introduction, for not
      until the pace quickens does one know what the performer intends. With the
      roar of the opening theme he knew that things were going extraordinarily;
      in the chords that herald the conclusion he heard the hammer strokes of
      victory. He was glad that she only played the first movement, for he could
      have paid no attention to the winding intricacies of the measures of
      nine-sixteen. The audience clapped, no less respectful. It was Mr. Beebe
      who started the stamping; it was all that one could do.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who is she?&rdquo; he asked the vicar afterwards.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cousin of one of my parishioners. I do not consider her choice of a piece
      happy. Beethoven is so usually simple and direct in his appeal that it is
      sheer perversity to choose a thing like that, which, if anything,
      disturbs.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Introduce me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She will be delighted. She and Miss Bartlett are full of the praises of
      your sermon.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My sermon?&rdquo; cried Mr. Beebe. &ldquo;Why ever did she listen to it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      When he was introduced he understood why, for Miss Honeychurch, disjoined
      from her music stool, was only a young lady with a quantity of dark hair
      and a very pretty, pale, undeveloped face. She loved going to concerts,
      she loved stopping with her cousin, she loved iced coffee and meringues.
      He did not doubt that she loved his sermon also. But before he left
      Tunbridge Wells he made a remark to the vicar, which he now made to Lucy
      herself when she closed the little piano and moved dreamily towards him:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If Miss Honeychurch ever takes to live as she plays, it will be very
      exciting both for us and for her.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy at once re-entered daily life.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, what a funny thing! Some one said just the same to mother, and she
      said she trusted I should never live a duet.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Doesn&rsquo;t Mrs. Honeychurch like music?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She doesn&rsquo;t mind it. But she doesn&rsquo;t like one to get excited over
      anything; she thinks I am silly about it. She thinks&mdash;I can&rsquo;t make
      out. Once, you know, I said that I liked my own playing better than any
      one&rsquo;s. She has never got over it. Of course, I didn&rsquo;t mean that I played
      well; I only meant&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course,&rdquo; said he, wondering why she bothered to explain.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Music&mdash;&rdquo; said Lucy, as if attempting some generality. She could not
      complete it, and looked out absently upon Italy in the wet. The whole life
      of the South was disorganized, and the most graceful nation in Europe had
      turned into formless lumps of clothes.
    </p>
    <p>
      The street and the river were dirty yellow, the bridge was dirty grey, and
      the hills were dirty purple. Somewhere in their folds were concealed Miss
      Lavish and Miss Bartlett, who had chosen this afternoon to visit the Torre
      del Gallo.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What about music?&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Poor Charlotte will be sopped,&rdquo; was Lucy&rsquo;s reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      The expedition was typical of Miss Bartlett, who would return cold, tired,
      hungry, and angelic, with a ruined skirt, a pulpy Baedeker, and a tickling
      cough in her throat. On another day, when the whole world was singing and
      the air ran into the mouth, like wine, she would refuse to stir from the
      drawing-room, saying that she was an old thing, and no fit companion for a
      hearty girl.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Lavish has led your cousin astray. She hopes to find the true Italy
      in the wet I believe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Lavish is so original,&rdquo; murmured Lucy. This was a stock remark, the
      supreme achievement of the Pension Bertolini in the way of definition.
      Miss Lavish was so original. Mr. Beebe had his doubts, but they would have
      been put down to clerical narrowness. For that, and for other reasons, he
      held his peace.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is it true,&rdquo; continued Lucy in awe-struck tone, &ldquo;that Miss Lavish is
      writing a book?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They do say so.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is it about?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It will be a novel,&rdquo; replied Mr. Beebe, &ldquo;dealing with modern Italy. Let
      me refer you for an account to Miss Catharine Alan, who uses words herself
      more admirably than any one I know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I wish Miss Lavish would tell me herself. We started such friends. But I
      don&rsquo;t think she ought to have run away with Baedeker that morning in Santa
      Croce. Charlotte was most annoyed at finding me practically alone, and so
      I couldn&rsquo;t help being a little annoyed with Miss Lavish.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The two ladies, at all events, have made it up.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He was interested in the sudden friendship between women so apparently
      dissimilar as Miss Bartlett and Miss Lavish. They were always in each
      other&rsquo;s company, with Lucy a slighted third. Miss Lavish he believed he
      understood, but Miss Bartlett might reveal unknown depths of strangeness,
      though not perhaps, of meaning. Was Italy deflecting her from the path of
      prim chaperon, which he had assigned to her at Tunbridge Wells? All his
      life he had loved to study maiden ladies; they were his specialty, and his
      profession had provided him with ample opportunities for the work. Girls
      like Lucy were charming to look at, but Mr. Beebe was, from rather
      profound reasons, somewhat chilly in his attitude towards the other sex,
      and preferred to be interested rather than enthralled.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy, for the third time, said that poor Charlotte would be sopped. The
      Arno was rising in flood, washing away the traces of the little carts upon
      the foreshore. But in the south-west there had appeared a dull haze of
      yellow, which might mean better weather if it did not mean worse. She
      opened the window to inspect, and a cold blast entered the room, drawing a
      plaintive cry from Miss Catharine Alan, who entered at the same moment by
      the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, dear Miss Honeychurch, you will catch a chill! And Mr. Beebe here
      besides. Who would suppose this is Italy? There is my sister actually
      nursing the hot-water can; no comforts or proper provisions.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She sidled towards them and sat down, self-conscious as she always was on
      entering a room which contained one man, or a man and one woman.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I could hear your beautiful playing, Miss Honeychurch, though I was in my
      room with the door shut. Doors shut; indeed, most necessary. No one has
      the least idea of privacy in this country. And one person catches it from
      another.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy answered suitably. Mr. Beebe was not able to tell the ladies of his
      adventure at Modena, where the chambermaid burst in upon him in his bath,
      exclaiming cheerfully, &ldquo;Fa niente, sono vecchia.&rdquo; He contented himself
      with saying: &ldquo;I quite agree with you, Miss Alan. The Italians are a most
      unpleasant people. They pry everywhere, they see everything, and they know
      what we want before we know it ourselves. We are at their mercy. They read
      our thoughts, they foretell our desires. From the cab-driver down to&mdash;to
      Giotto, they turn us inside out, and I resent it. Yet in their heart of
      hearts they are&mdash;how superficial! They have no conception of the
      intellectual life. How right is Signora Bertolini, who exclaimed to me the
      other day: &lsquo;Ho, Mr. Beebe, if you knew what I suffer over the children&rsquo;s
      edjucaishion. HI won&rsquo;t &lsquo;ave my little Victorier taught by a hignorant
      Italian what can&rsquo;t explain nothink!&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Alan did not follow, but gathered that she was being mocked in an
      agreeable way. Her sister was a little disappointed in Mr. Beebe, having
      expected better things from a clergyman whose head was bald and who wore a
      pair of russet whiskers. Indeed, who would have supposed that tolerance,
      sympathy, and a sense of humour would inhabit that militant form?
    </p>
    <p>
      In the midst of her satisfaction she continued to sidle, and at last the
      cause was disclosed. From the chair beneath her she extracted a gun-metal
      cigarette-case, on which were powdered in turquoise the initials &ldquo;E. L.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That belongs to Lavish.&rdquo; said the clergyman. &ldquo;A good fellow, Lavish, but
      I wish she&rsquo;d start a pipe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Mr. Beebe,&rdquo; said Miss Alan, divided between awe and mirth. &ldquo;Indeed,
      though it is dreadful for her to smoke, it is not quite as dreadful as you
      suppose. She took to it, practically in despair, after her life&rsquo;s work was
      carried away in a landslip. Surely that makes it more excusable.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What was that?&rdquo; asked Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe sat back complacently, and Miss Alan began as follows: &ldquo;It was a
      novel&mdash;and I am afraid, from what I can gather, not a very nice
      novel. It is so sad when people who have abilities misuse them, and I must
      say they nearly always do. Anyhow, she left it almost finished in the
      Grotto of the Calvary at the Capuccini Hotel at Amalfi while she went for
      a little ink. She said: &lsquo;Can I have a little ink, please?&rsquo; But you know
      what Italians are, and meanwhile the Grotto fell roaring on to the beach,
      and the saddest thing of all is that she cannot remember what she has
      written. The poor thing was very ill after it, and so got tempted into
      cigarettes. It is a great secret, but I am glad to say that she is writing
      another novel. She told Teresa and Miss Pole the other day that she had
      got up all the local colour&mdash;this novel is to be about modern Italy;
      the other was historical&mdash;but that she could not start till she had
      an idea. First she tried Perugia for an inspiration, then she came here&mdash;this
      must on no account get round. And so cheerful through it all! I cannot
      help thinking that there is something to admire in everyone, even if you
      do not approve of them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Alan was always thus being charitable against her better judgement. A
      delicate pathos perfumed her disconnected remarks, giving them unexpected
      beauty, just as in the decaying autumn woods there sometimes rise odours
      reminiscent of spring. She felt she had made almost too many allowances,
      and apologized hurriedly for her toleration.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All the same, she is a little too&mdash;I hardly like to say unwomanly,
      but she behaved most strangely when the Emersons arrived.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe smiled as Miss Alan plunged into an anecdote which he knew she
      would be unable to finish in the presence of a gentleman.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know, Miss Honeychurch, if you have noticed that Miss Pole, the
      lady who has so much yellow hair, takes lemonade. That old Mr. Emerson,
      who puts things very strangely&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Her jaw dropped. She was silent. Mr. Beebe, whose social resources were
      endless, went out to order some tea, and she continued to Lucy in a hasty
      whisper:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Stomach. He warned Miss Pole of her stomach-acidity, he called it&mdash;and
      he may have meant to be kind. I must say I forgot myself and laughed; it
      was so sudden. As Teresa truly said, it was no laughing matter. But the
      point is that Miss Lavish was positively ATTRACTED by his mentioning S.,
      and said she liked plain speaking, and meeting different grades of
      thought. She thought they were commercial travellers&mdash;&lsquo;drummers&rsquo; was
      the word she used&mdash;and all through dinner she tried to prove that
      England, our great and beloved country, rests on nothing but commerce.
      Teresa was very much annoyed, and left the table before the cheese, saying
      as she did so: &lsquo;There, Miss Lavish, is one who can confute you better than
      I,&rsquo; and pointed to that beautiful picture of Lord Tennyson. Then Miss
      Lavish said: &lsquo;Tut! The early Victorians.&rsquo; Just imagine! &lsquo;Tut! The early
      Victorians.&rsquo; My sister had gone, and I felt bound to speak. I said: &lsquo;Miss
      Lavish, I am an early Victorian; at least, that is to say, I will hear no
      breath of censure against our dear Queen.&rsquo; It was horrible speaking. I
      reminded her how the Queen had been to Ireland when she did not want to
      go, and I must say she was dumbfounded, and made no reply. But, unluckily,
      Mr. Emerson overheard this part, and called in his deep voice: &lsquo;Quite so,
      quite so! I honour the woman for her Irish visit.&rsquo; The woman! I tell
      things so badly; but you see what a tangle we were in by this time, all on
      account of S. having been mentioned in the first place. But that was not
      all. After dinner Miss Lavish actually came up and said: &lsquo;Miss Alan, I am
      going into the smoking-room to talk to those two nice men. Come, too.&rsquo;
      Needless to say, I refused such an unsuitable invitation, and she had the
      impertinence to tell me that it would broaden my ideas, and said that she
      had four brothers, all University men, except one who was in the army, who
      always made a point of talking to commercial travellers.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let me finish the story,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe, who had returned.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Lavish tried Miss Pole, myself, everyone, and finally said: &lsquo;I
      shall go alone.&rsquo; She went. At the end of five minutes she returned
      unobtrusively with a green baize board, and began playing patience.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Whatever happened?&rdquo; cried Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No one knows. No one will ever know. Miss Lavish will never dare to tell,
      and Mr. Emerson does not think it worth telling.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Beebe&mdash;old Mr. Emerson, is he nice or not nice? I do so want to
      know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe laughed and suggested that she should settle the question for
      herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No; but it is so difficult. Sometimes he is so silly, and then I do not
      mind him. Miss Alan, what do you think? Is he nice?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The little old lady shook her head, and sighed disapprovingly. Mr. Beebe,
      whom the conversation amused, stirred her up by saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I consider that you are bound to class him as nice, Miss Alan, after that
      business of the violets.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Violets? Oh, dear! Who told you about the violets? How do things get
      round? A pension is a bad place for gossips. No, I cannot forget how they
      behaved at Mr. Eager&rsquo;s lecture at Santa Croce. Oh, poor Miss Honeychurch!
      It really was too bad. No, I have quite changed. I do NOT like the
      Emersons. They are not nice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe smiled nonchalantly. He had made a gentle effort to introduce
      the Emersons into Bertolini society, and the effort had failed. He was
      almost the only person who remained friendly to them. Miss Lavish, who
      represented intellect, was avowedly hostile, and now the Miss Alans, who
      stood for good breeding, were following her. Miss Bartlett, smarting under
      an obligation, would scarcely be civil. The case of Lucy was different.
      She had given him a hazy account of her adventures in Santa Croce, and he
      gathered that the two men had made a curious and possibly concerted
      attempt to annex her, to show her the world from their own strange
      standpoint, to interest her in their private sorrows and joys. This was
      impertinent; he did not wish their cause to be championed by a young girl:
      he would rather it should fail. After all, he knew nothing about them, and
      pension joys, pension sorrows, are flimsy things; whereas Lucy would be
      his parishioner.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy, with one eye upon the weather, finally said that she thought the
      Emersons were nice; not that she saw anything of them now. Even their
      seats at dinner had been moved.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But aren&rsquo;t they always waylaying you to go out with them, dear?&rdquo; said the
      little lady inquisitively.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Only once. Charlotte didn&rsquo;t like it, and said something&mdash;quite
      politely, of course.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Most right of her. They don&rsquo;t understand our ways. They must find their
      level.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe rather felt that they had gone under. They had given up their
      attempt&mdash;if it was one&mdash;to conquer society, and now the father
      was almost as silent as the son. He wondered whether he would not plan a
      pleasant day for these folk before they left&mdash;some expedition,
      perhaps, with Lucy well chaperoned to be nice to them. It was one of Mr.
      Beebe&rsquo;s chief pleasures to provide people with happy memories.
    </p>
    <p>
      Evening approached while they chatted; the air became brighter; the
      colours on the trees and hills were purified, and the Arno lost its muddy
      solidity and began to twinkle. There were a few streaks of bluish-green
      among the clouds, a few patches of watery light upon the earth, and then
      the dripping facade of San Miniato shone brilliantly in the declining sun.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Too late to go out,&rdquo; said Miss Alan in a voice of relief. &ldquo;All the
      galleries are shut.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think I shall go out,&rdquo; said Lucy. &ldquo;I want to go round the town in the
      circular tram&mdash;on the platform by the driver.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Her two companions looked grave. Mr. Beebe, who felt responsible for her
      in the absence of Miss Bartlett, ventured to say:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I wish we could. Unluckily I have letters. If you do want to go out
      alone, won&rsquo;t you be better on your feet?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Italians, dear, you know,&rdquo; said Miss Alan.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps I shall meet someone who reads me through and through!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But they still looked disapproval, and she so far conceded to Mr. Beebe as
      to say that she would only go for a little walk, and keep to the street
      frequented by tourists.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She oughtn&rsquo;t really to go at all,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe, as they watched her
      from the window, &ldquo;and she knows it. I put it down to too much Beethoven.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0004" id="link2HCH0004">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter IV: Fourth Chapter
    </h2>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe was right. Lucy never knew her desires so clearly as after
      music. She had not really appreciated the clergyman&rsquo;s wit, nor the
      suggestive twitterings of Miss Alan. Conversation was tedious; she wanted
      something big, and she believed that it would have come to her on the
      wind-swept platform of an electric tram. This she might not attempt. It
      was unladylike. Why? Why were most big things unladylike? Charlotte had
      once explained to her why. It was not that ladies were inferior to men; it
      was that they were different. Their mission was to inspire others to
      achievement rather than to achieve themselves. Indirectly, by means of
      tact and a spotless name, a lady could accomplish much. But if she rushed
      into the fray herself she would be first censured, then despised, and
      finally ignored. Poems had been written to illustrate this point.
    </p>
    <p>
      There is much that is immortal in this medieval lady. The dragons have
      gone, and so have the knights, but still she lingers in our midst. She
      reigned in many an early Victorian castle, and was Queen of much early
      Victorian song. It is sweet to protect her in the intervals of business,
      sweet to pay her honour when she has cooked our dinner well. But alas! the
      creature grows degenerate. In her heart also there are springing up
      strange desires. She too is enamoured of heavy winds, and vast panoramas,
      and green expanses of the sea. She has marked the kingdom of this world,
      how full it is of wealth, and beauty, and war&mdash;a radiant crust, built
      around the central fires, spinning towards the receding heavens. Men,
      declaring that she inspires them to it, move joyfully over the surface,
      having the most delightful meetings with other men, happy, not because
      they are masculine, but because they are alive. Before the show breaks up
      she would like to drop the august title of the Eternal Woman, and go there
      as her transitory self.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy does not stand for the medieval lady, who was rather an ideal to
      which she was bidden to lift her eyes when feeling serious. Nor has she
      any system of revolt. Here and there a restriction annoyed her
      particularly, and she would transgress it, and perhaps be sorry that she
      had done so. This afternoon she was peculiarly restive. She would really
      like to do something of which her well-wishers disapproved. As she might
      not go on the electric tram, she went to Alinari&rsquo;s shop.
    </p>
    <p>
      There she bought a photograph of Botticelli&rsquo;s &ldquo;Birth of Venus.&rdquo; Venus,
      being a pity, spoilt the picture, otherwise so charming, and Miss Bartlett
      had persuaded her to do without it. (A pity in art of course signified the
      nude.) Giorgione&rsquo;s &ldquo;Tempesta,&rdquo; the &ldquo;Idolino,&rdquo; some of the Sistine frescoes
      and the Apoxyomenos, were added to it. She felt a little calmer then, and
      bought Fra Angelico&rsquo;s &ldquo;Coronation,&rdquo; Giotto&rsquo;s &ldquo;Ascension of St. John,&rdquo; some
      Della Robbia babies, and some Guido Reni Madonnas. For her taste was
      catholic, and she extended uncritical approval to every well-known name.
    </p>
    <p>
      But though she spent nearly seven lire, the gates of liberty seemed still
      unopened. She was conscious of her discontent; it was new to her to be
      conscious of it. &ldquo;The world,&rdquo; she thought, &ldquo;is certainly full of beautiful
      things, if only I could come across them.&rdquo; It was not surprising that Mrs.
      Honeychurch disapproved of music, declaring that it always left her
      daughter peevish, unpractical, and touchy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nothing ever happens to me,&rdquo; she reflected, as she entered the Piazza
      Signoria and looked nonchalantly at its marvels, now fairly familiar to
      her. The great square was in shadow; the sunshine had come too late to
      strike it. Neptune was already unsubstantial in the twilight, half god,
      half ghost, and his fountain plashed dreamily to the men and satyrs who
      idled together on its marge. The Loggia showed as the triple entrance of a
      cave, wherein many a deity, shadowy, but immortal, looking forth upon the
      arrivals and departures of mankind. It was the hour of unreality&mdash;the
      hour, that is, when unfamiliar things are real. An older person at such an
      hour and in such a place might think that sufficient was happening to him,
      and rest content. Lucy desired more.
    </p>
    <p>
      She fixed her eyes wistfully on the tower of the palace, which rose out of
      the lower darkness like a pillar of roughened gold. It seemed no longer a
      tower, no longer supported by earth, but some unattainable treasure
      throbbing in the tranquil sky. Its brightness mesmerized her, still
      dancing before her eyes when she bent them to the ground and started
      towards home.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then something did happen.
    </p>
    <p>
      Two Italians by the Loggia had been bickering about a debt. &ldquo;Cinque lire,&rdquo;
       they had cried, &ldquo;cinque lire!&rdquo; They sparred at each other, and one of them
      was hit lightly upon the chest. He frowned; he bent towards Lucy with a
      look of interest, as if he had an important message for her. He opened his
      lips to deliver it, and a stream of red came out between them and trickled
      down his unshaven chin.
    </p>
    <p>
      That was all. A crowd rose out of the dusk. It hid this extraordinary man
      from her, and bore him away to the fountain. Mr. George Emerson happened
      to be a few paces away, looking at her across the spot where the man had
      been. How very odd! Across something. Even as she caught sight of him he
      grew dim; the palace itself grew dim, swayed above her, fell on to her
      softly, slowly, noiselessly, and the sky fell with it.
    </p>
    <p>
      She thought: &ldquo;Oh, what have I done?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, what have I done?&rdquo; she murmured, and opened her eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      George Emerson still looked at her, but not across anything. She had
      complained of dullness, and lo! one man was stabbed, and another held her
      in his arms.
    </p>
    <p>
      They were sitting on some steps in the Uffizi Arcade. He must have carried
      her. He rose when she spoke, and began to dust his knees. She repeated:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, what have I done?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You fainted.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&mdash;I am very sorry.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How are you now?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perfectly well&mdash;absolutely well.&rdquo; And she began to nod and smile.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then let us come home. There&rsquo;s no point in our stopping.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He held out his hand to pull her up. She pretended not to see it. The
      cries from the fountain&mdash;they had never ceased&mdash;rang emptily.
      The whole world seemed pale and void of its original meaning.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How very kind you have been! I might have hurt myself falling. But now I
      am well. I can go alone, thank you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      His hand was still extended.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, my photographs!&rdquo; she exclaimed suddenly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What photographs?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I bought some photographs at Alinari&rsquo;s. I must have dropped them out
      there in the square.&rdquo; She looked at him cautiously. &ldquo;Would you add to your
      kindness by fetching them?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He added to his kindness. As soon as he had turned his back, Lucy arose
      with the running of a maniac and stole down the arcade towards the Arno.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Honeychurch!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She stopped with her hand on her heart.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You sit still; you aren&rsquo;t fit to go home alone.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I am, thank you so very much.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, you aren&rsquo;t. You&rsquo;d go openly if you were.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I had rather&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then I don&rsquo;t fetch your photographs.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I had rather be alone.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He said imperiously: &ldquo;The man is dead&mdash;the man is probably dead; sit
      down till you are rested.&rdquo; She was bewildered, and obeyed him. &ldquo;And don&rsquo;t
      move till I come back.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      In the distance she saw creatures with black hoods, such as appear in
      dreams. The palace tower had lost the reflection of the declining day, and
      joined itself to earth. How should she talk to Mr. Emerson when he
      returned from the shadowy square? Again the thought occurred to her, &ldquo;Oh,
      what have I done?&rdquo;&mdash;the thought that she, as well as the dying man,
      had crossed some spiritual boundary.
    </p>
    <p>
      He returned, and she talked of the murder. Oddly enough, it was an easy
      topic. She spoke of the Italian character; she became almost garrulous
      over the incident that had made her faint five minutes before. Being
      strong physically, she soon overcame the horror of blood. She rose without
      his assistance, and though wings seemed to flutter inside her, she walked
      firmly enough towards the Arno. There a cabman signalled to them; they
      refused him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And the murderer tried to kiss him, you say&mdash;how very odd Italians
      are!&mdash;and gave himself up to the police! Mr. Beebe was saying that
      Italians know everything, but I think they are rather childish. When my
      cousin and I were at the Pitti yesterday&mdash;What was that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He had thrown something into the stream.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What did you throw in?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Things I didn&rsquo;t want,&rdquo; he said crossly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Emerson!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where are the photographs?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He was silent.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I believe it was my photographs that you threw away.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t know what to do with them,&rdquo; he cried, and his voice was that of
      an anxious boy. Her heart warmed towards him for the first time. &ldquo;They
      were covered with blood. There! I&rsquo;m glad I&rsquo;ve told you; and all the time
      we were making conversation I was wondering what to do with them.&rdquo; He
      pointed down-stream. &ldquo;They&rsquo;ve gone.&rdquo; The river swirled under the bridge,
      &ldquo;I did mind them so, and one is so foolish, it seemed better that they
      should go out to the sea&mdash;I don&rsquo;t know; I may just mean that they
      frightened me.&rdquo; Then the boy verged into a man. &ldquo;For something tremendous
      has happened; I must face it without getting muddled. It isn&rsquo;t exactly
      that a man has died.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Something warned Lucy that she must stop him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It has happened,&rdquo; he repeated, &ldquo;and I mean to find out what it is.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Emerson&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He turned towards her frowning, as if she had disturbed him in some
      abstract quest.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want to ask you something before we go in.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They were close to their pension. She stopped and leant her elbows against
      the parapet of the embankment. He did likewise. There is at times a magic
      in identity of position; it is one of the things that have suggested to us
      eternal comradeship. She moved her elbows before saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have behaved ridiculously.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He was following his own thoughts.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I was never so much ashamed of myself in my life; I cannot think what
      came over me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I nearly fainted myself,&rdquo; he said; but she felt that her attitude
      repelled him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I owe you a thousand apologies.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, all right.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And&mdash;this is the real point&mdash;you know how silly people are
      gossiping&mdash;ladies especially, I am afraid&mdash;you understand what I
      mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m afraid I don&rsquo;t.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I mean, would you not mention it to any one, my foolish behaviour?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your behaviour? Oh, yes, all right&mdash;all right.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Thank you so much. And would you&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She could not carry her request any further. The river was rushing below
      them, almost black in the advancing night. He had thrown her photographs
      into it, and then he had told her the reason. It struck her that it was
      hopeless to look for chivalry in such a man. He would do her no harm by
      idle gossip; he was trustworthy, intelligent, and even kind; he might even
      have a high opinion of her. But he lacked chivalry; his thoughts, like his
      behaviour, would not be modified by awe. It was useless to say to him,
      &ldquo;And would you&mdash;&rdquo; and hope that he would complete the sentence for
      himself, averting his eyes from her nakedness like the knight in that
      beautiful picture. She had been in his arms, and he remembered it, just as
      he remembered the blood on the photographs that she had bought in
      Alinari&rsquo;s shop. It was not exactly that a man had died; something had
      happened to the living: they had come to a situation where character
      tells, and where childhood enters upon the branching paths of Youth.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, thank you so much,&rdquo; she repeated, &ldquo;How quickly these accidents do
      happen, and then one returns to the old life!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Anxiety moved her to question him.
    </p>
    <p>
      His answer was puzzling: &ldquo;I shall probably want to live.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But why, Mr. Emerson? What do you mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I shall want to live, I say.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Leaning her elbows on the parapet, she contemplated the River Arno, whose
      roar was suggesting some unexpected melody to her ears.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0005" id="link2HCH0005">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter V: Possibilities of a Pleasant Outing
    </h2>
    <p>
      It was a family saying that &ldquo;you never knew which way Charlotte Bartlett
      would turn.&rdquo; She was perfectly pleasant and sensible over Lucy&rsquo;s
      adventure, found the abridged account of it quite adequate, and paid
      suitable tribute to the courtesy of Mr. George Emerson. She and Miss
      Lavish had had an adventure also. They had been stopped at the Dazio
      coming back, and the young officials there, who seemed impudent and
      desoeuvre, had tried to search their reticules for provisions. It might
      have been most unpleasant. Fortunately Miss Lavish was a match for any
      one.
    </p>
    <p>
      For good or for evil, Lucy was left to face her problem alone. None of her
      friends had seen her, either in the Piazza or, later on, by the
      embankment. Mr. Beebe, indeed, noticing her startled eyes at dinner-time,
      had again passed to himself the remark of &ldquo;Too much Beethoven.&rdquo; But he
      only supposed that she was ready for an adventure, not that she had
      encountered it. This solitude oppressed her; she was accustomed to have
      her thoughts confirmed by others or, at all events, contradicted; it was
      too dreadful not to know whether she was thinking right or wrong.
    </p>
    <p>
      At breakfast next morning she took decisive action. There were two plans
      between which she had to choose. Mr. Beebe was walking up to the Torre del
      Gallo with the Emersons and some American ladies. Would Miss Bartlett and
      Miss Honeychurch join the party? Charlotte declined for herself; she had
      been there in the rain the previous afternoon. But she thought it an
      admirable idea for Lucy, who hated shopping, changing money, fetching
      letters, and other irksome duties&mdash;all of which Miss Bartlett must
      accomplish this morning and could easily accomplish alone.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, Charlotte!&rdquo; cried the girl, with real warmth. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s very kind of Mr.
      Beebe, but I am certainly coming with you. I had much rather.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well, dear,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, with a faint flush of pleasure that
      called forth a deep flush of shame on the cheeks of Lucy. How abominably
      she behaved to Charlotte, now as always! But now she should alter. All
      morning she would be really nice to her.
    </p>
    <p>
      She slipped her arm into her cousin&rsquo;s, and they started off along the
      Lung&rsquo; Arno. The river was a lion that morning in strength, voice, and
      colour. Miss Bartlett insisted on leaning over the parapet to look at it.
      She then made her usual remark, which was &ldquo;How I do wish Freddy and your
      mother could see this, too!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy fidgeted; it was tiresome of Charlotte to have stopped exactly where
      she did.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Look, Lucia! Oh, you are watching for the Torre del Gallo party. I feared
      you would repent you of your choice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Serious as the choice had been, Lucy did not repent. Yesterday had been a
      muddle&mdash;queer and odd, the kind of thing one could not write down
      easily on paper&mdash;but she had a feeling that Charlotte and her
      shopping were preferable to George Emerson and the summit of the Torre del
      Gallo. Since she could not unravel the tangle, she must take care not to
      re-enter it. She could protest sincerely against Miss Bartlett&rsquo;s
      insinuations.
    </p>
    <p>
      But though she had avoided the chief actor, the scenery unfortunately
      remained. Charlotte, with the complacency of fate, led her from the river
      to the Piazza Signoria. She could not have believed that stones, a Loggia,
      a fountain, a palace tower, would have such significance. For a moment she
      understood the nature of ghosts.
    </p>
    <p>
      The exact site of the murder was occupied, not by a ghost, but by Miss
      Lavish, who had the morning newspaper in her hand. She hailed them
      briskly. The dreadful catastrophe of the previous day had given her an
      idea which she thought would work up into a book.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, let me congratulate you!&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett. &ldquo;After your despair of
      yesterday! What a fortunate thing!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Aha! Miss Honeychurch, come you here I am in luck. Now, you are to tell
      me absolutely everything that you saw from the beginning.&rdquo; Lucy poked at
      the ground with her parasol.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But perhaps you would rather not?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sorry&mdash;if you could manage without it, I think I would rather
      not.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The elder ladies exchanged glances, not of disapproval; it is suitable
      that a girl should feel deeply.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is I who am sorry,&rdquo; said Miss Lavish &ldquo;literary hacks are shameless
      creatures. I believe there&rsquo;s no secret of the human heart into which we
      wouldn&rsquo;t pry.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She marched cheerfully to the fountain and back, and did a few
      calculations in realism. Then she said that she had been in the Piazza
      since eight o&rsquo;clock collecting material. A good deal of it was unsuitable,
      but of course one always had to adapt. The two men had quarrelled over a
      five-franc note. For the five-franc note she should substitute a young
      lady, which would raise the tone of the tragedy, and at the same time
      furnish an excellent plot.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is the heroine&rsquo;s name?&rdquo; asked Miss Bartlett.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Leonora,&rdquo; said Miss Lavish; her own name was Eleanor.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I do hope she&rsquo;s nice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      That desideratum would not be omitted.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And what is the plot?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Love, murder, abduction, revenge, was the plot. But it all came while the
      fountain plashed to the satyrs in the morning sun.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hope you will excuse me for boring on like this,&rdquo; Miss Lavish
      concluded. &ldquo;It is so tempting to talk to really sympathetic people. Of
      course, this is the barest outline. There will be a deal of local
      colouring, descriptions of Florence and the neighbourhood, and I shall
      also introduce some humorous characters. And let me give you all fair
      warning: I intend to be unmerciful to the British tourist.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, you wicked woman,&rdquo; cried Miss Bartlett. &ldquo;I am sure you are thinking
      of the Emersons.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Lavish gave a Machiavellian smile.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I confess that in Italy my sympathies are not with my own countrymen. It
      is the neglected Italians who attract me, and whose lives I am going to
      paint so far as I can. For I repeat and I insist, and I have always held
      most strongly, that a tragedy such as yesterday&rsquo;s is not the less tragic
      because it happened in humble life.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a fitting silence when Miss Lavish had concluded. Then the
      cousins wished success to her labours, and walked slowly away across the
      square.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She is my idea of a really clever woman,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett. &ldquo;That last
      remark struck me as so particularly true. It should be a most pathetic
      novel.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy assented. At present her great aim was not to get put into it. Her
      perceptions this morning were curiously keen, and she believed that Miss
      Lavish had her on trial for an ingenue.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She is emancipated, but only in the very best sense of the word,&rdquo;
       continued Miss Bartlett slowly. &ldquo;None but the superficial would be shocked
      at her. We had a long talk yesterday. She believes in justice and truth
      and human interest. She told me also that she has a high opinion of the
      destiny of woman&mdash;Mr. Eager! Why, how nice! What a pleasant
      surprise!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, not for me,&rdquo; said the chaplain blandly, &ldquo;for I have been watching you
      and Miss Honeychurch for quite a little time.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We were chatting to Miss Lavish.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      His brow contracted.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So I saw. Were you indeed? Andate via! sono occupato!&rdquo; The last remark
      was made to a vender of panoramic photographs who was approaching with a
      courteous smile. &ldquo;I am about to venture a suggestion. Would you and Miss
      Honeychurch be disposed to join me in a drive some day this week&mdash;a
      drive in the hills? We might go up by Fiesole and back by Settignano.
      There is a point on that road where we could get down and have an hour&rsquo;s
      ramble on the hillside. The view thence of Florence is most beautiful&mdash;far
      better than the hackneyed view of Fiesole. It is the view that Alessio
      Baldovinetti is fond of introducing into his pictures. That man had a
      decided feeling for landscape. Decidedly. But who looks at it to-day? Ah,
      the world is too much for us.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett had not heard of Alessio Baldovinetti, but she knew that Mr.
      Eager was no commonplace chaplain. He was a member of the residential
      colony who had made Florence their home. He knew the people who never
      walked about with Baedekers, who had learnt to take a siesta after lunch,
      who took drives the pension tourists had never heard of, and saw by
      private influence galleries which were closed to them. Living in delicate
      seclusion, some in furnished flats, others in Renaissance villas on
      Fiesole&rsquo;s slope, they read, wrote, studied, and exchanged ideas, thus
      attaining to that intimate knowledge, or rather perception, of Florence
      which is denied to all who carry in their pockets the coupons of Cook.
    </p>
    <p>
      Therefore an invitation from the chaplain was something to be proud of.
      Between the two sections of his flock he was often the only link, and it
      was his avowed custom to select those of his migratory sheep who seemed
      worthy, and give them a few hours in the pastures of the permanent. Tea at
      a Renaissance villa? Nothing had been said about it yet. But if it did
      come to that&mdash;how Lucy would enjoy it!
    </p>
    <p>
      A few days ago and Lucy would have felt the same. But the joys of life
      were grouping themselves anew. A drive in the hills with Mr. Eager and
      Miss Bartlett&mdash;even if culminating in a residential tea-party&mdash;was
      no longer the greatest of them. She echoed the raptures of Charlotte
      somewhat faintly. Only when she heard that Mr. Beebe was also coming did
      her thanks become more sincere.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So we shall be a partie carree,&rdquo; said the chaplain. &ldquo;In these days of
      toil and tumult one has great needs of the country and its message of
      purity. Andate via! andate presto, presto! Ah, the town! Beautiful as it
      is, it is the town.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They assented.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This very square&mdash;so I am told&mdash;witnessed yesterday the most
      sordid of tragedies. To one who loves the Florence of Dante and Savonarola
      there is something portentous in such desecration&mdash;portentous and
      humiliating.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Humiliating indeed,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett. &ldquo;Miss Honeychurch happened to be
      passing through as it happened. She can hardly bear to speak of it.&rdquo; She
      glanced at Lucy proudly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And how came we to have you here?&rdquo; asked the chaplain paternally.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett&rsquo;s recent liberalism oozed away at the question. &ldquo;Do not
      blame her, please, Mr. Eager. The fault is mine: I left her unchaperoned.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So you were here alone, Miss Honeychurch?&rdquo; His voice suggested
      sympathetic reproof but at the same time indicated that a few harrowing
      details would not be unacceptable. His dark, handsome face drooped
      mournfully towards her to catch her reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Practically.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;One of our pension acquaintances kindly brought her home,&rdquo; said Miss
      Bartlett, adroitly concealing the sex of the preserver.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;For her also it must have been a terrible experience. I trust that
      neither of you was at all&mdash;that it was not in your immediate
      proximity?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Of the many things Lucy was noticing to-day, not the least remarkable was
      this: the ghoulish fashion in which respectable people will nibble after
      blood. George Emerson had kept the subject strangely pure.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He died by the fountain, I believe,&rdquo; was her reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you and your friend&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Were over at the Loggia.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That must have saved you much. You have not, of course, seen the
      disgraceful illustrations which the gutter Press&mdash;This man is a
      public nuisance; he knows that I am a resident perfectly well, and yet he
      goes on worrying me to buy his vulgar views.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Surely the vendor of photographs was in league with Lucy&mdash;in the
      eternal league of Italy with youth. He had suddenly extended his book
      before Miss Bartlett and Mr. Eager, binding their hands together by a long
      glossy ribbon of churches, pictures, and views.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This is too much!&rdquo; cried the chaplain, striking petulantly at one of Fra
      Angelico&rsquo;s angels. She tore. A shrill cry rose from the vendor. The book
      it seemed, was more valuable than one would have supposed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Willingly would I purchase&mdash;&rdquo; began Miss Bartlett.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ignore him,&rdquo; said Mr. Eager sharply, and they all walked rapidly away
      from the square.
    </p>
    <p>
      But an Italian can never be ignored, least of all when he has a grievance.
      His mysterious persecution of Mr. Eager became relentless; the air rang
      with his threats and lamentations. He appealed to Lucy; would not she
      intercede? He was poor&mdash;he sheltered a family&mdash;the tax on bread.
      He waited, he gibbered, he was recompensed, he was dissatisfied, he did
      not leave them until he had swept their minds clean of all thoughts
      whether pleasant or unpleasant.
    </p>
    <p>
      Shopping was the topic that now ensued. Under the chaplain&rsquo;s guidance they
      selected many hideous presents and mementoes&mdash;florid little
      picture-frames that seemed fashioned in gilded pastry; other little
      frames, more severe, that stood on little easels, and were carven out of
      oak; a blotting book of vellum; a Dante of the same material; cheap mosaic
      brooches, which the maids, next Christmas, would never tell from real;
      pins, pots, heraldic saucers, brown art-photographs; Eros and Psyche in
      alabaster; St. Peter to match&mdash;all of which would have cost less in
      London.
    </p>
    <p>
      This successful morning left no pleasant impressions on Lucy. She had been
      a little frightened, both by Miss Lavish and by Mr. Eager, she knew not
      why. And as they frightened her, she had, strangely enough, ceased to
      respect them. She doubted that Miss Lavish was a great artist. She doubted
      that Mr. Eager was as full of spirituality and culture as she had been led
      to suppose. They were tried by some new test, and they were found wanting.
      As for Charlotte&mdash;as for Charlotte she was exactly the same. It might
      be possible to be nice to her; it was impossible to love her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The son of a labourer; I happen to know it for a fact. A mechanic of some
      sort himself when he was young; then he took to writing for the
      Socialistic Press. I came across him at Brixton.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They were talking about the Emersons.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How wonderfully people rise in these days!&rdquo; sighed Miss Bartlett,
      fingering a model of the leaning Tower of Pisa.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Generally,&rdquo; replied Mr. Eager, &ldquo;one has only sympathy for their success.
      The desire for education and for social advance&mdash;in these things
      there is something not wholly vile. There are some working men whom one
      would be very willing to see out here in Florence&mdash;little as they
      would make of it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is he a journalist now?&rdquo; Miss Bartlett asked.
</p>
    <p>
&ldquo;He is not; he made an advantageous marriage.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He uttered this remark with a voice full of meaning, and ended with a
      sigh.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, so he has a wife.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dead, Miss Bartlett, dead. I wonder&mdash;yes I wonder how he has the
      effrontery to look me in the face, to dare to claim acquaintance with me.
      He was in my London parish long ago. The other day in Santa Croce, when he
      was with Miss Honeychurch, I snubbed him. Let him beware that he does not
      get more than a snub.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What?&rdquo; cried Lucy, flushing.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Exposure!&rdquo; hissed Mr. Eager.
    </p>
    <p>
      He tried to change the subject; but in scoring a dramatic point he had
      interested his audience more than he had intended. Miss Bartlett was full
      of very natural curiosity. Lucy, though she wished never to see the
      Emersons again, was not disposed to condemn them on a single word.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you mean,&rdquo; she asked, &ldquo;that he is an irreligious man? We know that
      already.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy, dear&mdash;&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, gently reproving her cousin&rsquo;s
      penetration.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I should be astonished if you knew all. The boy&mdash;an innocent child
      at the time&mdash;I will exclude. God knows what his education and his
      inherited qualities may have made him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, &ldquo;it is something that we had better not
      hear.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To speak plainly,&rdquo; said Mr. Eager, &ldquo;it is. I will say no more.&rdquo; For the
      first time Lucy&rsquo;s rebellious thoughts swept out in words&mdash;for the
      first time in her life.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have said very little.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It was my intention to say very little,&rdquo; was his frigid reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      He gazed indignantly at the girl, who met him with equal indignation. She
      turned towards him from the shop counter; her breast heaved quickly. He
      observed her brow, and the sudden strength of her lips. It was intolerable
      that she should disbelieve him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Murder, if you want to know,&rdquo; he cried angrily. &ldquo;That man murdered his
      wife!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How?&rdquo; she retorted.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To all intents and purposes he murdered her. That day in Santa Croce&mdash;did
      they say anything against me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not a word, Mr. Eager&mdash;not a single word.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, I thought they had been libelling me to you. But I suppose it is only
      their personal charms that makes you defend them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not defending them,&rdquo; said Lucy, losing her courage, and relapsing
      into the old chaotic methods. &ldquo;They&rsquo;re nothing to me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How could you think she was defending them?&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, much
      discomfited by the unpleasant scene. The shopman was possibly listening.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She will find it difficult. For that man has murdered his wife in the
      sight of God.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The addition of God was striking. But the chaplain was really trying to
      qualify a rash remark. A silence followed which might have been
      impressive, but was merely awkward. Then Miss Bartlett hastily purchased
      the Leaning Tower, and led the way into the street.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I must be going,&rdquo; said he, shutting his eyes and taking out his watch.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett thanked him for his kindness, and spoke with enthusiasm of
      the approaching drive.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Drive? Oh, is our drive to come off?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy was recalled to her manners, and after a little exertion the
      complacency of Mr. Eager was restored.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Bother the drive!&rdquo; exclaimed the girl, as soon as he had departed. &ldquo;It is
      just the drive we had arranged with Mr. Beebe without any fuss at all. Why
      should he invite us in that absurd manner? We might as well invite him. We
      are each paying for ourselves.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett, who had intended to lament over the Emersons, was launched
      by this remark into unexpected thoughts.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If that is so, dear&mdash;if the drive we and Mr. Beebe are going with
      Mr. Eager is really the same as the one we are going with Mr. Beebe, then
      I foresee a sad kettle of fish.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because Mr. Beebe has asked Eleanor Lavish to come, too.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That will mean another carriage.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Far worse. Mr. Eager does not like Eleanor. She knows it herself. The
      truth must be told; she is too unconventional for him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They were now in the newspaper-room at the English bank. Lucy stood by the
      central table, heedless of Punch and the Graphic, trying to answer, or at
      all events to formulate the questions rioting in her brain. The well-known
      world had broken up, and there emerged Florence, a magic city where people
      thought and did the most extraordinary things. Murder, accusations of
      murder, a lady clinging to one man and being rude to another&mdash;were
      these the daily incidents of her streets? Was there more in her frank
      beauty than met the eye&mdash;the power, perhaps, to evoke passions, good
      and bad, and to bring them speedily to a fulfillment?
    </p>
    <p>
      Happy Charlotte, who, though greatly troubled over things that did not
      matter, seemed oblivious to things that did; who could conjecture with
      admirable delicacy &ldquo;where things might lead to,&rdquo; but apparently lost sight
      of the goal as she approached it. Now she was crouching in the corner
      trying to extract a circular note from a kind of linen nose-bag which hung
      in chaste concealment round her neck. She had been told that this was the
      only safe way to carry money in Italy; it must only be broached within the
      walls of the English bank. As she groped she murmured: &ldquo;Whether it is Mr.
      Beebe who forgot to tell Mr. Eager, or Mr. Eager who forgot when he told
      us, or whether they have decided to leave Eleanor out altogether&mdash;which
      they could scarcely do&mdash;but in any case we must be prepared. It is
      you they really want; I am only asked for appearances. You shall go with
      the two gentlemen, and I and Eleanor will follow behind. A one-horse
      carriage would do for us. Yet how difficult it is!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is indeed,&rdquo; replied the girl, with a gravity that sounded sympathetic.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you think about it?&rdquo; asked Miss Bartlett, flushed from the
      struggle, and buttoning up her dress.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know what I think, nor what I want.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, dear, Lucy! I do hope Florence isn&rsquo;t boring you. Speak the word, and,
      as you know, I would take you to the ends of the earth to-morrow.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Thank you, Charlotte,&rdquo; said Lucy, and pondered over the offer.
    </p>
    <p>
      There were letters for her at the bureau&mdash;one from her brother, full
      of athletics and biology; one from her mother, delightful as only her
      mother&rsquo;s letters could be. She had read in it of the crocuses which had
      been bought for yellow and were coming up puce, of the new parlour-maid,
      who had watered the ferns with essence of lemonade, of the semi-detached
      cottages which were ruining Summer Street, and breaking the heart of Sir
      Harry Otway. She recalled the free, pleasant life of her home, where she
      was allowed to do everything, and where nothing ever happened to her. The
      road up through the pine-woods, the clean drawing-room, the view over the
      Sussex Weald&mdash;all hung before her bright and distinct, but pathetic
      as the pictures in a gallery to which, after much experience, a traveller
      returns.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And the news?&rdquo; asked Miss Bartlett.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mrs. Vyse and her son have gone to Rome,&rdquo; said Lucy, giving the news that
      interested her least. &ldquo;Do you know the Vyses?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, not that way back. We can never have too much of the dear Piazza
      Signoria.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They&rsquo;re nice people, the Vyses. So clever&mdash;my idea of what&rsquo;s really
      clever. Don&rsquo;t you long to be in Rome?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I die for it!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Piazza Signoria is too stony to be brilliant. It has no grass, no
      flowers, no frescoes, no glittering walls of marble or comforting patches
      of ruddy brick. By an odd chance&mdash;unless we believe in a presiding
      genius of places&mdash;the statues that relieve its severity suggest, not
      the innocence of childhood, nor the glorious bewilderment of youth, but
      the conscious achievements of maturity. Perseus and Judith, Hercules and
      Thusnelda, they have done or suffered something, and though they are
      immortal, immortality has come to them after experience, not before. Here,
      not only in the solitude of Nature, might a hero meet a goddess, or a
      heroine a god.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Charlotte!&rdquo; cried the girl suddenly. &ldquo;Here&rsquo;s an idea. What if we popped
      off to Rome to-morrow&mdash;straight to the Vyses&rsquo; hotel? For I do know
      what I want. I&rsquo;m sick of Florence. No, you said you&rsquo;d go to the ends of
      the earth! Do! Do!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett, with equal vivacity, replied:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, you droll person! Pray, what would become of your drive in the
      hills?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They passed together through the gaunt beauty of the square, laughing over
      the unpractical suggestion.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0006" id="link2HCH0006">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter VI: The Reverend Arthur Beebe, the Reverend Cuthbert Eager, Mr.
      Emerson, Mr. George Emerson, Miss Eleanor Lavish, Miss Charlotte Bartlett,
      and Miss Lucy Honeychurch Drive Out in Carriages to See a View; Italians
      Drive Them.
    </h2>
    <p>
      It was Phaethon who drove them to Fiesole that memorable day, a youth all
      irresponsibility and fire, recklessly urging his master&rsquo;s horses up the
      stony hill. Mr. Beebe recognized him at once. Neither the Ages of Faith
      nor the Age of Doubt had touched him; he was Phaethon in Tuscany driving a
      cab. And it was Persephone whom he asked leave to pick up on the way,
      saying that she was his sister&mdash;Persephone, tall and slender and
      pale, returning with the Spring to her mother&rsquo;s cottage, and still shading
      her eyes from the unaccustomed light. To her Mr. Eager objected, saying
      that here was the thin edge of the wedge, and one must guard against
      imposition. But the ladies interceded, and when it had been made clear
      that it was a very great favour, the goddess was allowed to mount beside
      the god.
    </p>
    <p>
      Phaethon at once slipped the left rein over her head, thus enabling
      himself to drive with his arm round her waist. She did not mind. Mr.
      Eager, who sat with his back to the horses, saw nothing of the indecorous
      proceeding, and continued his conversation with Lucy. The other two
      occupants of the carriage were old Mr. Emerson and Miss Lavish. For a
      dreadful thing had happened: Mr. Beebe, without consulting Mr. Eager, had
      doubled the size of the party. And though Miss Bartlett and Miss Lavish
      had planned all the morning how the people were to sit, at the critical
      moment when the carriages came round they lost their heads, and Miss
      Lavish got in with Lucy, while Miss Bartlett, with George Emerson and Mr.
      Beebe, followed on behind.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was hard on the poor chaplain to have his partie carree thus
      transformed. Tea at a Renaissance villa, if he had ever meditated it, was
      now impossible. Lucy and Miss Bartlett had a certain style about them, and
      Mr. Beebe, though unreliable, was a man of parts. But a shoddy lady writer
      and a journalist who had murdered his wife in the sight of God&mdash;they
      should enter no villa at his introduction.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy, elegantly dressed in white, sat erect and nervous amid these
      explosive ingredients, attentive to Mr. Eager, repressive towards Miss
      Lavish, watchful of old Mr. Emerson, hitherto fortunately asleep, thanks
      to a heavy lunch and the drowsy atmosphere of Spring. She looked on the
      expedition as the work of Fate. But for it she would have avoided George
      Emerson successfully. In an open manner he had shown that he wished to
      continue their intimacy. She had refused, not because she disliked him,
      but because she did not know what had happened, and suspected that he did
      know. And this frightened her.
    </p>
    <p>
      For the real event&mdash;whatever it was&mdash;had taken place, not in the
      Loggia, but by the river. To behave wildly at the sight of death is
      pardonable. But to discuss it afterwards, to pass from discussion into
      silence, and through silence into sympathy, that is an error, not of a
      startled emotion, but of the whole fabric. There was really something
      blameworthy (she thought) in their joint contemplation of the shadowy
      stream, in the common impulse which had turned them to the house without
      the passing of a look or word. This sense of wickedness had been slight at
      first. She had nearly joined the party to the Torre del Gallo. But each
      time that she avoided George it became more imperative that she should
      avoid him again. And now celestial irony, working through her cousin and
      two clergymen, did not suffer her to leave Florence till she had made this
      expedition with him through the hills.
    </p>
    <p>
      Meanwhile Mr. Eager held her in civil converse; their little tiff was
      over.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So, Miss Honeychurch, you are travelling? As a student of art?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, dear me, no&mdash;oh, no!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps as a student of human nature,&rdquo; interposed Miss Lavish, &ldquo;like
      myself?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, no. I am here as a tourist.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, indeed,&rdquo; said Mr. Eager. &ldquo;Are you indeed? If you will not think me
      rude, we residents sometimes pity you poor tourists not a little&mdash;handed
      about like a parcel of goods from Venice to Florence, from Florence to
      Rome, living herded together in pensions or hotels, quite unconscious of
      anything that is outside Baedeker, their one anxiety to get &lsquo;done&rsquo; or
      &lsquo;through&rsquo; and go on somewhere else. The result is, they mix up towns,
      rivers, palaces in one inextricable whirl. You know the American girl in
      Punch who says: &lsquo;Say, poppa, what did we see at Rome?&rsquo; And the father
      replies: &lsquo;Why, guess Rome was the place where we saw the yaller dog.&rsquo;
      There&rsquo;s travelling for you. Ha! ha! ha!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I quite agree,&rdquo; said Miss Lavish, who had several times tried to
      interrupt his mordant wit. &ldquo;The narrowness and superficiality of the
      Anglo-Saxon tourist is nothing less than a menace.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Quite so. Now, the English colony at Florence, Miss Honeychurch&mdash;and
      it is of considerable size, though, of course, not all equally&mdash;a few
      are here for trade, for example. But the greater part are students. Lady
      Helen Laverstock is at present busy over Fra Angelico. I mention her name
      because we are passing her villa on the left. No, you can only see it if
      you stand&mdash;no, do not stand; you will fall. She is very proud of that
      thick hedge. Inside, perfect seclusion. One might have gone back six
      hundred years. Some critics believe that her garden was the scene of The
      Decameron, which lends it an additional interest, does it not?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It does indeed!&rdquo; cried Miss Lavish. &ldquo;Tell me, where do they place the
      scene of that wonderful seventh day?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But Mr. Eager proceeded to tell Miss Honeychurch that on the right lived
      Mr. Someone Something, an American of the best type&mdash;so rare!&mdash;and
      that the Somebody Elses were farther down the hill. &ldquo;Doubtless you know
      her monographs in the series of &lsquo;Mediaeval Byways&rsquo;? He is working at
      Gemistus Pletho. Sometimes as I take tea in their beautiful grounds I
      hear, over the wall, the electric tram squealing up the new road with its
      loads of hot, dusty, unintelligent tourists who are going to &lsquo;do&rsquo; Fiesole
      in an hour in order that they may say they have been there, and I think&mdash;think&mdash;I
      think how little they think what lies so near them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      During this speech the two figures on the box were sporting with each
      other disgracefully. Lucy had a spasm of envy. Granted that they wished to
      misbehave, it was pleasant for them to be able to do so. They were
      probably the only people enjoying the expedition. The carriage swept with
      agonizing jolts up through the Piazza of Fiesole and into the Settignano
      road.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Piano! piano!&rdquo; said Mr. Eager, elegantly waving his hand over his head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Va bene, signore, va bene, va bene,&rdquo; crooned the driver, and whipped his
      horses up again.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now Mr. Eager and Miss Lavish began to talk against each other on the
      subject of Alessio Baldovinetti. Was he a cause of the Renaissance, or was
      he one of its manifestations? The other carriage was left behind. As the
      pace increased to a gallop the large, slumbering form of Mr. Emerson was
      thrown against the chaplain with the regularity of a machine.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Piano! piano!&rdquo; said he, with a martyred look at Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      An extra lurch made him turn angrily in his seat. Phaethon, who for some
      time had been endeavouring to kiss Persephone, had just succeeded.
    </p>
    <p>
      A little scene ensued, which, as Miss Bartlett said afterwards, was most
      unpleasant. The horses were stopped, the lovers were ordered to
      disentangle themselves, the boy was to lose his pourboire, the girl was
      immediately to get down.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She is my sister,&rdquo; said he, turning round on them with piteous eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Eager took the trouble to tell him that he was a liar.
    </p>
    <p>
      Phaethon hung down his head, not at the matter of the accusation, but at
      its manner. At this point Mr. Emerson, whom the shock of stopping had
      awoke, declared that the lovers must on no account be separated, and
      patted them on the back to signify his approval. And Miss Lavish, though
      unwilling to ally him, felt bound to support the cause of Bohemianism.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Most certainly I would let them be,&rdquo; she cried. &ldquo;But I dare say I shall
      receive scant support. I have always flown in the face of the conventions
      all my life. This is what I call an adventure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We must not submit,&rdquo; said Mr. Eager. &ldquo;I knew he was trying it on. He is
      treating us as if we were a party of Cook&rsquo;s tourists.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Surely no!&rdquo; said Miss Lavish, her ardour visibly decreasing.
    </p>
    <p>
      The other carriage had drawn up behind, and sensible Mr. Beebe called out
      that after this warning the couple would be sure to behave themselves
      properly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Leave them alone,&rdquo; Mr. Emerson begged the chaplain, of whom he stood in
      no awe. &ldquo;Do we find happiness so often that we should turn it off the box
      when it happens to sit there? To be driven by lovers&mdash;A king might
      envy us, and if we part them it&rsquo;s more like sacrilege than anything I
      know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Here the voice of Miss Bartlett was heard saying that a crowd had begun to
      collect.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Eager, who suffered from an over-fluent tongue rather than a resolute
      will, was determined to make himself heard. He addressed the driver again.
      Italian in the mouth of Italians is a deep-voiced stream, with unexpected
      cataracts and boulders to preserve it from monotony. In Mr. Eager&rsquo;s mouth
      it resembled nothing so much as an acid whistling fountain which played
      ever higher and higher, and quicker and quicker, and more and more
      shrilly, till abruptly it was turned off with a click.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Signorina!&rdquo; said the man to Lucy, when the display had ceased. Why should
      he appeal to Lucy?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Signorina!&rdquo; echoed Persephone in her glorious contralto. She pointed at
      the other carriage. Why?
    </p>
    <p>
      For a moment the two girls looked at each other. Then Persephone got down
      from the box.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Victory at last!&rdquo; said Mr. Eager, smiting his hands together as the
      carriages started again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is not victory,&rdquo; said Mr. Emerson. &ldquo;It is defeat. You have parted two
      people who were happy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Eager shut his eyes. He was obliged to sit next to Mr. Emerson, but he
      would not speak to him. The old man was refreshed by sleep, and took up
      the matter warmly. He commanded Lucy to agree with him; he shouted for
      support to his son.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We have tried to buy what cannot be bought with money. He has bargained
      to drive us, and he is doing it. We have no rights over his soul.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Lavish frowned. It is hard when a person you have classed as
      typically British speaks out of his character.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He was not driving us well,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;He jolted us.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That I deny. It was as restful as sleeping. Aha! he is jolting us now.
      Can you wonder? He would like to throw us out, and most certainly he is
      justified. And if I were superstitious I&rsquo;d be frightened of the girl, too.
      It doesn&rsquo;t do to injure young people. Have you ever heard of Lorenzo de
      Medici?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Lavish bristled.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Most certainly I have. Do you refer to Lorenzo il Magnifico, or to
      Lorenzo, Duke of Urbino, or to Lorenzo surnamed Lorenzino on account of
      his diminutive stature?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Lord knows. Possibly he does know, for I refer to Lorenzo the poet.
      He wrote a line&mdash;so I heard yesterday&mdash;which runs like this:
      &lsquo;Don&rsquo;t go fighting against the Spring.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Eager could not resist the opportunity for erudition.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Non fate guerra al Maggio,&rdquo; he murmured. &ldquo;&lsquo;War not with the May&rsquo; would
      render a correct meaning.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The point is, we have warred with it. Look.&rdquo; He pointed to the Val
      d&rsquo;Arno, which was visible far below them, through the budding trees.
      &ldquo;Fifty miles of Spring, and we&rsquo;ve come up to admire them. Do you suppose
      there&rsquo;s any difference between Spring in nature and Spring in man? But
      there we go, praising the one and condemning the other as improper,
      ashamed that the same laws work eternally through both.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      No one encouraged him to talk. Presently Mr. Eager gave a signal for the
      carriages to stop and marshalled the party for their ramble on the hill. A
      hollow like a great amphitheatre, full of terraced steps and misty olives,
      now lay between them and the heights of Fiesole, and the road, still
      following its curve, was about to sweep on to a promontory which stood out
      in the plain. It was this promontory, uncultivated, wet, covered with
      bushes and occasional trees, which had caught the fancy of Alessio
      Baldovinetti nearly five hundred years before. He had ascended it, that
      diligent and rather obscure master, possibly with an eye to business,
      possibly for the joy of ascending. Standing there, he had seen that view
      of the Val d&rsquo;Arno and distant Florence, which he afterwards had introduced
      not very effectively into his work. But where exactly had he stood? That
      was the question which Mr. Eager hoped to solve now. And Miss Lavish,
      whose nature was attracted by anything problematical, had become equally
      enthusiastic.
    </p>
    <p>
      But it is not easy to carry the pictures of Alessio Baldovinetti in your
      head, even if you have remembered to look at them before starting. And the
      haze in the valley increased the difficulty of the quest.
    </p>
    <p>
      The party sprang about from tuft to tuft of grass, their anxiety to keep
      together being only equalled by their desire to go different directions.
      Finally they split into groups. Lucy clung to Miss Bartlett and Miss
      Lavish; the Emersons returned to hold laborious converse with the drivers;
      while the two clergymen, who were expected to have topics in common, were
      left to each other.
    </p>
    <p>
      The two elder ladies soon threw off the mask. In the audible whisper that
      was now so familiar to Lucy they began to discuss, not Alessio
      Baldovinetti, but the drive. Miss Bartlett had asked Mr. George Emerson
      what his profession was, and he had answered &ldquo;the railway.&rdquo; She was very
      sorry that she had asked him. She had no idea that it would be such a
      dreadful answer, or she would not have asked him. Mr. Beebe had turned the
      conversation so cleverly, and she hoped that the young man was not very
      much hurt at her asking him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The railway!&rdquo; gasped Miss Lavish. &ldquo;Oh, but I shall die! Of course it was
      the railway!&rdquo; She could not control her mirth. &ldquo;He is the image of a
      porter&mdash;on, on the South-Eastern.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eleanor, be quiet,&rdquo; plucking at her vivacious companion. &ldquo;Hush! They&rsquo;ll
      hear&mdash;the Emersons&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t stop. Let me go my wicked way. A porter&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eleanor!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure it&rsquo;s all right,&rdquo; put in Lucy. &ldquo;The Emersons won&rsquo;t hear, and they
      wouldn&rsquo;t mind if they did.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Lavish did not seem pleased at this.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Honeychurch listening!&rdquo; she said rather crossly. &ldquo;Pouf! Wouf! You
      naughty girl! Go away!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Lucy, you ought to be with Mr. Eager, I&rsquo;m sure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t find them now, and I don&rsquo;t want to either.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Eager will be offended. It is your party.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Please, I&rsquo;d rather stop here with you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I agree,&rdquo; said Miss Lavish. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s like a school feast; the boys have
      got separated from the girls. Miss Lucy, you are to go. We wish to
      converse on high topics unsuited for your ear.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The girl was stubborn. As her time at Florence drew to its close she was
      only at ease amongst those to whom she felt indifferent. Such a one was
      Miss Lavish, and such for the moment was Charlotte. She wished she had not
      called attention to herself; they were both annoyed at her remark and
      seemed determined to get rid of her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How tired one gets,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett. &ldquo;Oh, I do wish Freddy and your
      mother could be here.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Unselfishness with Miss Bartlett had entirely usurped the functions of
      enthusiasm. Lucy did not look at the view either. She would not enjoy
      anything till she was safe at Rome.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then sit you down,&rdquo; said Miss Lavish. &ldquo;Observe my foresight.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      With many a smile she produced two of those mackintosh squares that
      protect the frame of the tourist from damp grass or cold marble steps. She
      sat on one; who was to sit on the other?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy; without a moment&rsquo;s doubt, Lucy. The ground will do for me. Really I
      have not had rheumatism for years. If I do feel it coming on I shall
      stand. Imagine your mother&rsquo;s feelings if I let you sit in the wet in your
      white linen.&rdquo; She sat down heavily where the ground looked particularly
      moist. &ldquo;Here we are, all settled delightfully. Even if my dress is thinner
      it will not show so much, being brown. Sit down, dear; you are too
      unselfish; you don&rsquo;t assert yourself enough.&rdquo; She cleared her throat. &ldquo;Now
      don&rsquo;t be alarmed; this isn&rsquo;t a cold. It&rsquo;s the tiniest cough, and I have
      had it three days. It&rsquo;s nothing to do with sitting here at all.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was only one way of treating the situation. At the end of five
      minutes Lucy departed in search of Mr. Beebe and Mr. Eager, vanquished by
      the mackintosh square.
    </p>
    <p>
      She addressed herself to the drivers, who were sprawling in the carriages,
      perfuming the cushions with cigars. The miscreant, a bony young man
      scorched black by the sun, rose to greet her with the courtesy of a host
      and the assurance of a relative.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dove?&rdquo; said Lucy, after much anxious thought.
    </p>
    <p>
      His face lit up. Of course he knew where. Not so far either. His arm swept
      three-fourths of the horizon. He should just think he did know where. He
      pressed his finger-tips to his forehead and then pushed them towards her,
      as if oozing with visible extract of knowledge.
    </p>
    <p>
      More seemed necessary. What was the Italian for &ldquo;clergyman&rdquo;?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dove buoni uomini?&rdquo; said she at last.
    </p>
    <p>
      Good? Scarcely the adjective for those noble beings! He showed her his
      cigar.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Uno&mdash;piu&mdash;piccolo,&rdquo; was her next remark, implying &ldquo;Has the
      cigar been given to you by Mr. Beebe, the smaller of the two good men?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She was correct as usual. He tied the horse to a tree, kicked it to make
      it stay quiet, dusted the carriage, arranged his hair, remoulded his hat,
      encouraged his moustache, and in rather less than a quarter of a minute
      was ready to conduct her. Italians are born knowing the way. It would seem
      that the whole earth lay before them, not as a map, but as a chess-board,
      whereon they continually behold the changing pieces as well as the
      squares. Any one can find places, but the finding of people is a gift from
      God.
    </p>
    <p>
      He only stopped once, to pick her some great blue violets. She thanked him
      with real pleasure. In the company of this common man the world was
      beautiful and direct. For the first time she felt the influence of Spring.
      His arm swept the horizon gracefully; violets, like other things, existed
      in great profusion there; &ldquo;would she like to see them?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ma buoni uomini.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He bowed. Certainly. Good men first, violets afterwards. They proceeded
      briskly through the undergrowth, which became thicker and thicker. They
      were nearing the edge of the promontory, and the view was stealing round
      them, but the brown network of the bushes shattered it into countless
      pieces. He was occupied in his cigar, and in holding back the pliant
      boughs. She was rejoicing in her escape from dullness. Not a step, not a
      twig, was unimportant to her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a voice in the wood, in the distance behind them. The voice of
      Mr. Eager? He shrugged his shoulders. An Italian&rsquo;s ignorance is sometimes
      more remarkable than his knowledge. She could not make him understand that
      perhaps they had missed the clergymen. The view was forming at last; she
      could discern the river, the golden plain, other hills.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eccolo!&rdquo; he exclaimed.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the same moment the ground gave way, and with a cry she fell out of the
      wood. Light and beauty enveloped her. She had fallen on to a little open
      terrace, which was covered with violets from end to end.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Courage!&rdquo; cried her companion, now standing some six feet above. &ldquo;Courage
      and love.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She did not answer. From her feet the ground sloped sharply into view, and
      violets ran down in rivulets and streams and cataracts, irrigating the
      hillside with blue, eddying round the tree stems collecting into pools in
      the hollows, covering the grass with spots of azure foam. But never again
      were they in such profusion; this terrace was the well-head, the primal
      source whence beauty gushed out to water the earth.
    </p>
    <p>
      Standing at its brink, like a swimmer who prepares, was the good man. But
      he was not the good man that she had expected, and he was alone.
    </p>
    <p>
      George had turned at the sound of her arrival. For a moment he
      contemplated her, as one who had fallen out of heaven. He saw radiant joy
      in her face, he saw the flowers beat against her dress in blue waves. The
      bushes above them closed. He stepped quickly forward and kissed her.
    </p>
    <p>
      Before she could speak, almost before she could feel, a voice called,
      &ldquo;Lucy! Lucy! Lucy!&rdquo; The silence of life had been broken by Miss Bartlett
      who stood brown against the view.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0007" id="link2HCH0007">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter VII: They Return
    </h2>
    <p>
      Some complicated game had been playing up and down the hillside all the
      afternoon. What it was and exactly how the players had sided, Lucy was
      slow to discover. Mr. Eager had met them with a questioning eye. Charlotte
      had repulsed him with much small talk. Mr. Emerson, seeking his son, was
      told whereabouts to find him. Mr. Beebe, who wore the heated aspect of a
      neutral, was bidden to collect the factions for the return home. There was
      a general sense of groping and bewilderment. Pan had been amongst them&mdash;not
      the great god Pan, who has been buried these two thousand years, but the
      little god Pan, who presides over social contretemps and unsuccessful
      picnics. Mr. Beebe had lost everyone, and had consumed in solitude the
      tea-basket which he had brought up as a pleasant surprise. Miss Lavish had
      lost Miss Bartlett. Lucy had lost Mr. Eager. Mr. Emerson had lost George.
      Miss Bartlett had lost a mackintosh square. Phaethon had lost the game.
    </p>
    <p>
      That last fact was undeniable. He climbed on to the box shivering, with
      his collar up, prophesying the swift approach of bad weather. &ldquo;Let us go
      immediately,&rdquo; he told them. &ldquo;The signorino will walk.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All the way? He will be hours,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Apparently. I told him it was unwise.&rdquo; He would look no one in the face;
      perhaps defeat was particularly mortifying for him. He alone had played
      skilfully, using the whole of his instinct, while the others had used
      scraps of their intelligence. He alone had divined what things were, and
      what he wished them to be. He alone had interpreted the message that Lucy
      had received five days before from the lips of a dying man. Persephone,
      who spends half her life in the grave&mdash;she could interpret it also.
      Not so these English. They gain knowledge slowly, and perhaps too late.
    </p>
    <p>
      The thoughts of a cab-driver, however just, seldom affect the lives of his
      employers. He was the most competent of Miss Bartlett&rsquo;s opponents, but
      infinitely the least dangerous. Once back in the town, he and his insight
      and his knowledge would trouble English ladies no more. Of course, it was
      most unpleasant; she had seen his black head in the bushes; he might make
      a tavern story out of it. But after all, what have we to do with taverns?
      Real menace belongs to the drawing-room. It was of drawing-room people
      that Miss Bartlett thought as she journeyed downwards towards the fading
      sun. Lucy sat beside her; Mr. Eager sat opposite, trying to catch her eye;
      he was vaguely suspicious. They spoke of Alessio Baldovinetti.
    </p>
    <p>
      Rain and darkness came on together. The two ladies huddled together under
      an inadequate parasol. There was a lightning flash, and Miss Lavish who
      was nervous, screamed from the carriage in front. At the next flash, Lucy
      screamed also. Mr. Eager addressed her professionally:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Courage, Miss Honeychurch, courage and faith. If I might say so, there is
      something almost blasphemous in this horror of the elements. Are we
      seriously to suppose that all these clouds, all this immense electrical
      display, is simply called into existence to extinguish you or me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;of course&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Even from the scientific standpoint the chances against our being struck
      are enormous. The steel knives, the only articles which might attract the
      current, are in the other carriage. And, in any case, we are infinitely
      safer than if we were walking. Courage&mdash;courage and faith.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Under the rug, Lucy felt the kindly pressure of her cousin&rsquo;s hand. At
      times our need for a sympathetic gesture is so great that we care not what
      exactly it signifies or how much we may have to pay for it afterwards.
      Miss Bartlett, by this timely exercise of her muscles, gained more than
      she would have got in hours of preaching or cross examination.
    </p>
    <p>
      She renewed it when the two carriages stopped, half into Florence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Eager!&rdquo; called Mr. Beebe. &ldquo;We want your assistance. Will you
      interpret for us?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;George!&rdquo; cried Mr. Emerson. &ldquo;Ask your driver which way George went. The
      boy may lose his way. He may be killed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Go, Mr. Eager,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, &ldquo;don&rsquo;t ask our driver; our driver is
      no help. Go and support poor Mr. Beebe&mdash;, he is nearly demented.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He may be killed!&rdquo; cried the old man. &ldquo;He may be killed!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Typical behaviour,&rdquo; said the chaplain, as he quitted the carriage. &ldquo;In
      the presence of reality that kind of person invariably breaks down.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What does he know?&rdquo; whispered Lucy as soon as they were alone.
      &ldquo;Charlotte, how much does Mr. Eager know?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nothing, dearest; he knows nothing. But&mdash;&rdquo; she pointed at the
      driver-&ldquo;HE knows everything. Dearest, had we better? Shall I?&rdquo; She took
      out her purse. &ldquo;It is dreadful to be entangled with low-class people. He
      saw it all.&rdquo; Tapping Phaethon&rsquo;s back with her guide-book, she said,
      &ldquo;Silenzio!&rdquo; and offered him a franc.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Va bene,&rdquo; he replied, and accepted it. As well this ending to his day as
      any. But Lucy, a mortal maid, was disappointed in him.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was an explosion up the road. The storm had struck the overhead wire
      of the tramline, and one of the great supports had fallen. If they had not
      stopped perhaps they might have been hurt. They chose to regard it as a
      miraculous preservation, and the floods of love and sincerity, which
      fructify every hour of life, burst forth in tumult. They descended from
      the carriages; they embraced each other. It was as joyful to be forgiven
      past unworthinesses as to forgive them. For a moment they realized vast
      possibilities of good.
    </p>
    <p>
      The older people recovered quickly. In the very height of their emotion
      they knew it to be unmanly or unladylike. Miss Lavish calculated that,
      even if they had continued, they would not have been caught in the
      accident. Mr. Eager mumbled a temperate prayer. But the drivers, through
      miles of dark squalid road, poured out their souls to the dryads and the
      saints, and Lucy poured out hers to her cousin.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Charlotte, dear Charlotte, kiss me. Kiss me again. Only you can
      understand me. You warned me to be careful. And I&mdash;I thought I was
      developing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do not cry, dearest. Take your time.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have been obstinate and silly&mdash;worse than you know, far worse.
      Once by the river&mdash;Oh, but he isn&rsquo;t killed&mdash;he wouldn&rsquo;t be
      killed, would he?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The thought disturbed her repentance. As a matter of fact, the storm was
      worst along the road; but she had been near danger, and so she thought it
      must be near to everyone.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I trust not. One would always pray against that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He is really&mdash;I think he was taken by surprise, just as I was
      before. But this time I&rsquo;m not to blame; I want you to believe that. I
      simply slipped into those violets. No, I want to be really truthful. I am
      a little to blame. I had silly thoughts. The sky, you know, was gold, and
      the ground all blue, and for a moment he looked like someone in a book.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In a book?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Heroes&mdash;gods&mdash;the nonsense of schoolgirls.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And then?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But, Charlotte, you know what happened then.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett was silent. Indeed, she had little more to learn. With a
      certain amount of insight she drew her young cousin affectionately to her.
      All the way back Lucy&rsquo;s body was shaken by deep sighs, which nothing could
      repress.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want to be truthful,&rdquo; she whispered. &ldquo;It is so hard to be absolutely
      truthful.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t be troubled, dearest. Wait till you are calmer. We will talk it
      over before bed-time in my room.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      So they re-entered the city with hands clasped. It was a shock to the girl
      to find how far emotion had ebbed in others. The storm had ceased, and Mr.
      Emerson was easier about his son. Mr. Beebe had regained good humour, and
      Mr. Eager was already snubbing Miss Lavish. Charlotte alone she was sure
      of&mdash;Charlotte, whose exterior concealed so much insight and love.
    </p>
    <p>
      The luxury of self-exposure kept her almost happy through the long
      evening. She thought not so much of what had happened as of how she should
      describe it. All her sensations, her spasms of courage, her moments of
      unreasonable joy, her mysterious discontent, should be carefully laid
      before her cousin. And together in divine confidence they would
      disentangle and interpret them all.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;At last,&rdquo; thought she, &ldquo;I shall understand myself. I shan&rsquo;t again be
      troubled by things that come out of nothing, and mean I don&rsquo;t know what.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Alan asked her to play. She refused vehemently. Music seemed to her
      the employment of a child. She sat close to her cousin, who, with
      commendable patience, was listening to a long story about lost luggage.
      When it was over she capped it by a story of her own. Lucy became rather
      hysterical with the delay. In vain she tried to check, or at all events to
      accelerate, the tale. It was not till a late hour that Miss Bartlett had
      recovered her luggage and could say in her usual tone of gentle reproach:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, dear, I at all events am ready for Bedfordshire. Come into my room,
      and I will give a good brush to your hair.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      With some solemnity the door was shut, and a cane chair placed for the
      girl. Then Miss Bartlett said &ldquo;So what is to be done?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She was unprepared for the question. It had not occurred to her that she
      would have to do anything. A detailed exhibition of her emotions was all
      that she had counted upon.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is to be done? A point, dearest, which you alone can settle.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The rain was streaming down the black windows, and the great room felt
      damp and chilly, One candle burnt trembling on the chest of drawers close
      to Miss Bartlett&rsquo;s toque, which cast monstrous and fantastic shadows on
      the bolted door. A tram roared by in the dark, and Lucy felt unaccountably
      sad, though she had long since dried her eyes. She lifted them to the
      ceiling, where the griffins and bassoons were colourless and vague, the
      very ghosts of joy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It has been raining for nearly four hours,&rdquo; she said at last.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett ignored the remark.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you propose to silence him?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The driver?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear girl, no; Mr. George Emerson.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy began to pace up and down the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t understand,&rdquo; she said at last.
    </p>
    <p>
      She understood very well, but she no longer wished to be absolutely
      truthful.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How are you going to stop him talking about it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have a feeling that talk is a thing he will never do.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I, too, intend to judge him charitably. But unfortunately I have met the
      type before. They seldom keep their exploits to themselves.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Exploits?&rdquo; cried Lucy, wincing under the horrible plural.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My poor dear, did you suppose that this was his first? Come here and
      listen to me. I am only gathering it from his own remarks. Do you remember
      that day at lunch when he argued with Miss Alan that liking one person is
      an extra reason for liking another?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; said Lucy, whom at the time the argument had pleased.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I am no prude. There is no need to call him a wicked young man, but
      obviously he is thoroughly unrefined. Let us put it down to his deplorable
      antecedents and education, if you wish. But we are no farther on with our
      question. What do you propose to do?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      An idea rushed across Lucy&rsquo;s brain, which, had she thought of it sooner
      and made it part of her, might have proved victorious.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I propose to speak to him,&rdquo; said she.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett uttered a cry of genuine alarm.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You see, Charlotte, your kindness&mdash;I shall never forget it. But&mdash;as
      you said&mdash;it is my affair. Mine and his.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you are going to IMPLORE him, to BEG him to keep silence?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Certainly not. There would be no difficulty. Whatever you ask him he
      answers, yes or no; then it is over. I have been frightened of him. But
      now I am not one little bit.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But we fear him for you, dear. You are so young and inexperienced, you
      have lived among such nice people, that you cannot realize what men can be&mdash;how
      they can take a brutal pleasure in insulting a woman whom her sex does not
      protect and rally round. This afternoon, for example, if I had not
      arrived, what would have happened?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t think,&rdquo; said Lucy gravely.
    </p>
    <p>
      Something in her voice made Miss Bartlett repeat her question, intoning it
      more vigorously.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What would have happened if I hadn&rsquo;t arrived?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t think,&rdquo; said Lucy again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When he insulted you, how would you have replied?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hadn&rsquo;t time to think. You came.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, but won&rsquo;t you tell me now what you would have done?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I should have&mdash;&rdquo; She checked herself, and broke the sentence off.
      She went up to the dripping window and strained her eyes into the
      darkness. She could not think what she would have done.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come away from the window, dear,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett. &ldquo;You will be seen
      from the road.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy obeyed. She was in her cousin&rsquo;s power. She could not modulate out the
      key of self-abasement in which she had started. Neither of them referred
      again to her suggestion that she should speak to George and settle the
      matter, whatever it was, with him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett became plaintive.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, for a real man! We are only two women, you and I. Mr. Beebe is
      hopeless. There is Mr. Eager, but you do not trust him. Oh, for your
      brother! He is young, but I know that his sister&rsquo;s insult would rouse in
      him a very lion. Thank God, chivalry is not yet dead. There are still left
      some men who can reverence woman.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      As she spoke, she pulled off her rings, of which she wore several, and
      ranged them upon the pin cushion. Then she blew into her gloves and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It will be a push to catch the morning train, but we must try.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What train?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The train to Rome.&rdquo; She looked at her gloves critically.
    </p>
    <p>
      The girl received the announcement as easily as it had been given.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When does the train to Rome go?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;At eight.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Signora Bertolini would be upset.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We must face that,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, not liking to say that she had
      given notice already.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She will make us pay for a whole week&rsquo;s pension.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I expect she will. However, we shall be much more comfortable at the
      Vyses&rsquo; hotel. Isn&rsquo;t afternoon tea given there for nothing?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, but they pay extra for wine.&rdquo; After this remark she remained
      motionless and silent. To her tired eyes Charlotte throbbed and swelled
      like a ghostly figure in a dream.
    </p>
    <p>
      They began to sort their clothes for packing, for there was no time to
      lose, if they were to catch the train to Rome. Lucy, when admonished,
      began to move to and fro between the rooms, more conscious of the
      discomforts of packing by candlelight than of a subtler ill. Charlotte,
      who was practical without ability, knelt by the side of an empty trunk,
      vainly endeavouring to pave it with books of varying thickness and size.
      She gave two or three sighs, for the stooping posture hurt her back, and,
      for all her diplomacy, she felt that she was growing old. The girl heard
      her as she entered the room, and was seized with one of those emotional
      impulses to which she could never attribute a cause. She only felt that
      the candle would burn better, the packing go easier, the world be happier,
      if she could give and receive some human love. The impulse had come before
      to-day, but never so strongly. She knelt down by her cousin&rsquo;s side and
      took her in her arms.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett returned the embrace with tenderness and warmth. But she was
      not a stupid woman, and she knew perfectly well that Lucy did not love
      her, but needed her to love. For it was in ominous tones that she said,
      after a long pause:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dearest Lucy, how will you ever forgive me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy was on her guard at once, knowing by bitter experience what forgiving
      Miss Bartlett meant. Her emotion relaxed, she modified her embrace a
      little, and she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Charlotte dear, what do you mean? As if I have anything to forgive!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have a great deal, and I have a very great deal to forgive myself,
      too. I know well how much I vex you at every turn.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But no&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett assumed her favourite role, that of the prematurely aged
      martyr.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, but yes! I feel that our tour together is hardly the success I had
      hoped. I might have known it would not do. You want someone younger and
      stronger and more in sympathy with you. I am too uninteresting and
      old-fashioned&mdash;only fit to pack and unpack your things.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Please&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My only consolation was that you found people more to your taste, and
      were often able to leave me at home. I had my own poor ideas of what a
      lady ought to do, but I hope I did not inflict them on you more than was
      necessary. You had your own way about these rooms, at all events.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You mustn&rsquo;t say these things,&rdquo; said Lucy softly.
    </p>
    <p>
      She still clung to the hope that she and Charlotte loved each other, heart
      and soul. They continued to pack in silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have been a failure,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, as she struggled with the
      straps of Lucy&rsquo;s trunk instead of strapping her own. &ldquo;Failed to make you
      happy; failed in my duty to your mother. She has been so generous to me; I
      shall never face her again after this disaster.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But mother will understand. It is not your fault, this trouble, and it
      isn&rsquo;t a disaster either.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is my fault, it is a disaster. She will never forgive me, and rightly.
      For instance, what right had I to make friends with Miss Lavish?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Every right.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When I was here for your sake? If I have vexed you it is equally true
      that I have neglected you. Your mother will see this as clearly as I do,
      when you tell her.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy, from a cowardly wish to improve the situation, said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why need mother hear of it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you tell her everything?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suppose I do generally.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I dare not break your confidence. There is something sacred in it. Unless
      you feel that it is a thing you could not tell her.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The girl would not be degraded to this.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Naturally I should have told her. But in case she should blame you in any
      way, I promise I will not, I am very willing not to. I will never speak of
      it either to her or to any one.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Her promise brought the long-drawn interview to a sudden close. Miss
      Bartlett pecked her smartly on both cheeks, wished her good-night, and
      sent her to her own room.
    </p>
    <p>
      For a moment the original trouble was in the background. George would seem
      to have behaved like a cad throughout; perhaps that was the view which one
      would take eventually. At present she neither acquitted nor condemned him;
      she did not pass judgement. At the moment when she was about to judge him
      her cousin&rsquo;s voice had intervened, and, ever since, it was Miss Bartlett
      who had dominated; Miss Bartlett who, even now, could be heard sighing
      into a crack in the partition wall; Miss Bartlett, who had really been
      neither pliable nor humble nor inconsistent. She had worked like a great
      artist; for a time&mdash;indeed, for years&mdash;she had been meaningless,
      but at the end there was presented to the girl the complete picture of a
      cheerless, loveless world in which the young rush to destruction until
      they learn better&mdash;a shamefaced world of precautions and barriers
      which may avert evil, but which do not seem to bring good, if we may judge
      from those who have used them most.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy was suffering from the most grievous wrong which this world has yet
      discovered: diplomatic advantage had been taken of her sincerity, of her
      craving for sympathy and love. Such a wrong is not easily forgotten. Never
      again did she expose herself without due consideration and precaution
      against rebuff. And such a wrong may react disastrously upon the soul.
    </p>
    <p>
      The door-bell rang, and she started to the shutters. Before she reached
      them she hesitated, turned, and blew out the candle. Thus it was that,
      though she saw someone standing in the wet below, he, though he looked
      up, did not see her.
    </p>
    <p>
      To reach his room he had to go by hers. She was still dressed. It struck
      her that she might slip into the passage and just say that she would be
      gone before he was up, and that their extraordinary intercourse was over.
    </p>
    <p>
      Whether she would have dared to do this was never proved. At the critical
      moment Miss Bartlett opened her own door, and her voice said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I wish one word with you in the drawing-room, Mr. Emerson, please.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Soon their footsteps returned, and Miss Bartlett said: &ldquo;Good-night, Mr.
      Emerson.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      His heavy, tired breathing was the only reply; the chaperon had done her
      work.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy cried aloud: &ldquo;It isn&rsquo;t true. It can&rsquo;t all be true. I want not to be
      muddled. I want to grow older quickly.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett tapped on the wall.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Go to bed at once, dear. You need all the rest you can get.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      In the morning they left for Rome.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_PART2" id="link2H_PART2">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      PART TWO
    </h2>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0008" id="link2HCH0008">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter VIII: Medieval
    </h2>
    <p>
      The drawing-room curtains at Windy Corner had been pulled to meet, for the
      carpet was new and deserved protection from the August sun. They were
      heavy curtains, reaching almost to the ground, and the light that filtered
      through them was subdued and varied. A poet&mdash;none was present&mdash;might
      have quoted, &ldquo;Life like a dome of many coloured glass,&rdquo; or might have
      compared the curtains to sluice-gates, lowered against the intolerable
      tides of heaven. Without was poured a sea of radiance; within, the glory,
      though visible, was tempered to the capacities of man.
    </p>
    <p>
      Two pleasant people sat in the room. One&mdash;a boy of nineteen&mdash;was
      studying a small manual of anatomy, and peering occasionally at a bone
      which lay upon the piano. From time to time he bounced in his chair and
      puffed and groaned, for the day was hot and the print small, and the human
      frame fearfully made; and his mother, who was writing a letter, did
      continually read out to him what she had written. And continually did she
      rise from her seat and part the curtains so that a rivulet of light fell
      across the carpet, and make the remark that they were still there.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where aren&rsquo;t they?&rdquo; said the boy, who was Freddy, Lucy&rsquo;s brother. &ldquo;I tell
      you I&rsquo;m getting fairly sick.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;For goodness&rsquo; sake go out of my drawing-room, then?&rdquo; cried Mrs.
      Honeychurch, who hoped to cure her children of slang by taking it
      literally.
    </p>
    <p>
      Freddy did not move or reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think things are coming to a head,&rdquo; she observed, rather wanting her
      son&rsquo;s opinion on the situation if she could obtain it without undue
      supplication.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Time they did.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am glad that Cecil is asking her this once more.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s his third go, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Freddy I do call the way you talk unkind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t mean to be unkind.&rdquo; Then he added: &ldquo;But I do think Lucy might
      have got this off her chest in Italy. I don&rsquo;t know how girls manage
      things, but she can&rsquo;t have said &lsquo;No&rsquo; properly before, or she wouldn&rsquo;t have
      to say it again now. Over the whole thing&mdash;I can&rsquo;t explain&mdash;I do
      feel so uncomfortable.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you indeed, dear? How interesting!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I feel&mdash;never mind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He returned to his work.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Just listen to what I have written to Mrs. Vyse. I said: &lsquo;Dear Mrs.
      Vyse.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, mother, you told me. A jolly good letter.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I said: &lsquo;Dear Mrs. Vyse, Cecil has just asked my permission about it, and
      I should be delighted, if Lucy wishes it. But&mdash;&lsquo;&rdquo; She stopped
      reading, &ldquo;I was rather amused at Cecil asking my permission at all. He has
      always gone in for unconventionality, and parents nowhere, and so forth.
      When it comes to the point, he can&rsquo;t get on without me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nor me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Freddy nodded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He asked me for my permission also.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She exclaimed: &ldquo;How very odd of him!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why so?&rdquo; asked the son and heir. &ldquo;Why shouldn&rsquo;t my permission be asked?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you know about Lucy or girls or anything? What ever did you say?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I said to Cecil, &lsquo;Take her or leave her; it&rsquo;s no business of mine!&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What a helpful answer!&rdquo; But her own answer, though more normal in its
      wording, had been to the same effect.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The bother is this,&rdquo; began Freddy.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then he took up his work again, too shy to say what the bother was. Mrs.
      Honeychurch went back to the window.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Freddy, you must come. There they still are!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t see you ought to go peeping like that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Peeping like that! Can&rsquo;t I look out of my own window?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But she returned to the writing-table, observing, as she passed her son,
      &ldquo;Still page 322?&rdquo; Freddy snorted, and turned over two leaves. For a brief
      space they were silent. Close by, beyond the curtains, the gentle murmur
      of a long conversation had never ceased.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The bother is this: I have put my foot in it with Cecil most awfully.&rdquo; He
      gave a nervous gulp. &ldquo;Not content with &lsquo;permission&rsquo;, which I did give&mdash;that
      is to say, I said, &lsquo;I don&rsquo;t mind&rsquo;&mdash;well, not content with that, he
      wanted to know whether I wasn&rsquo;t off my head with joy. He practically put
      it like this: Wasn&rsquo;t it a splendid thing for Lucy and for Windy Corner
      generally if he married her? And he would have an answer&mdash;he said it
      would strengthen his hand.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hope you gave a careful answer, dear.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I answered &lsquo;No&rsquo;&rdquo; said the boy, grinding his teeth. &ldquo;There! Fly into a
      stew! I can&rsquo;t help it&mdash;had to say it. I had to say no. He ought never
      to have asked me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ridiculous child!&rdquo; cried his mother. &ldquo;You think you&rsquo;re so holy and
      truthful, but really it&rsquo;s only abominable conceit. Do you suppose that a
      man like Cecil would take the slightest notice of anything you say? I hope
      he boxed your ears. How dare you say no?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, do keep quiet, mother! I had to say no when I couldn&rsquo;t say yes. I
      tried to laugh as if I didn&rsquo;t mean what I said, and, as Cecil laughed too,
      and went away, it may be all right. But I feel my foot&rsquo;s in it. Oh, do
      keep quiet, though, and let a man do some work.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch, with the air of one who has considered the
      subject, &ldquo;I shall not keep quiet. You know all that has passed between
      them in Rome; you know why he is down here, and yet you deliberately
      insult him, and try to turn him out of my house.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not a bit!&rdquo; he pleaded. &ldquo;I only let out I didn&rsquo;t like him. I don&rsquo;t hate
      him, but I don&rsquo;t like him. What I mind is that he&rsquo;ll tell Lucy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He glanced at the curtains dismally.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I like him,&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch. &ldquo;I know his mother; he&rsquo;s good,
      he&rsquo;s clever, he&rsquo;s rich, he&rsquo;s well connected&mdash;Oh, you needn&rsquo;t kick the
      piano! He&rsquo;s well connected&mdash;I&rsquo;ll say it again if you like: he&rsquo;s well
      connected.&rdquo; She paused, as if rehearsing her eulogy, but her face remained
      dissatisfied. She added: &ldquo;And he has beautiful manners.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I liked him till just now. I suppose it&rsquo;s having him spoiling Lucy&rsquo;s
      first week at home; and it&rsquo;s also something that Mr. Beebe said, not
      knowing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Beebe?&rdquo; said his mother, trying to conceal her interest. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t see
      how Mr. Beebe comes in.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You know Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s funny way, when you never quite know what he means.
      He said: &lsquo;Mr. Vyse is an ideal bachelor.&rsquo; I was very cute, I asked him
      what he meant. He said &lsquo;Oh, he&rsquo;s like me&mdash;better detached.&rsquo; I
      couldn&rsquo;t make him say any more, but it set me thinking. Since Cecil has
      come after Lucy he hasn&rsquo;t been so pleasant, at least&mdash;I can&rsquo;t
      explain.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You never can, dear. But I can. You are jealous of Cecil because he may
      stop Lucy knitting you silk ties.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The explanation seemed plausible, and Freddy tried to accept it. But at
      the back of his brain there lurked a dim mistrust. Cecil praised one too
      much for being athletic. Was that it? Cecil made one talk in one&rsquo;s own
      way. This tired one. Was that it? And Cecil was the kind of fellow who
      would never wear another fellow&rsquo;s cap. Unaware of his own profundity,
      Freddy checked himself. He must be jealous, or he would not dislike a man
      for such foolish reasons.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Will this do?&rdquo; called his mother. &ldquo;&lsquo;Dear Mrs. Vyse,&mdash;Cecil has just
      asked my permission about it, and I should be delighted if Lucy wishes
      it.&rsquo; Then I put in at the top, &lsquo;and I have told Lucy so.&rsquo; I must write the
      letter out again&mdash;&lsquo;and I have told Lucy so. But Lucy seems very
      uncertain, and in these days young people must decide for themselves.&rsquo; I
      said that because I didn&rsquo;t want Mrs. Vyse to think us old-fashioned. She
      goes in for lectures and improving her mind, and all the time a thick
      layer of flue under the beds, and the maid&rsquo;s dirty thumb-marks where you
      turn on the electric light. She keeps that flat abominably&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Suppose Lucy marries Cecil, would she live in a flat, or in the country?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t interrupt so foolishly. Where was I? Oh yes&mdash;&lsquo;Young people
      must decide for themselves. I know that Lucy likes your son, because she
      tells me everything, and she wrote to me from Rome when he asked her
      first.&rsquo; No, I&rsquo;ll cross that last bit out&mdash;it looks patronizing. I&rsquo;ll
      stop at &lsquo;because she tells me everything.&rsquo; Or shall I cross that out,
      too?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cross it out, too,&rdquo; said Freddy.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Honeychurch left it in.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then the whole thing runs: &lsquo;Dear Mrs. Vyse.&mdash;Cecil has just asked my
      permission about it, and I should be delighted if Lucy wishes it, and I
      have told Lucy so. But Lucy seems very uncertain, and in these days young
      people must decide for themselves. I know that Lucy likes your son,
      because she tells me everything. But I do not know&mdash;&lsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Look out!&rdquo; cried Freddy.
    </p>
    <p>
      The curtains parted.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil&rsquo;s first movement was one of irritation. He couldn&rsquo;t bear the
      Honeychurch habit of sitting in the dark to save the furniture.
      Instinctively he give the curtains a twitch, and sent them swinging down
      their poles. Light entered. There was revealed a terrace, such as is owned
      by many villas with trees each side of it, and on it a little rustic seat,
      and two flower-beds. But it was transfigured by the view beyond, for Windy
      Corner was built on the range that overlooks the Sussex Weald. Lucy, who
      was in the little seat, seemed on the edge of a green magic carpet which
      hovered in the air above the tremulous world.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil entered.
    </p>
    <p>
      Appearing thus late in the story, Cecil must be at once described. He was
      medieval. Like a Gothic statue. Tall and refined, with shoulders that
      seemed braced square by an effort of the will, and a head that was tilted
      a little higher than the usual level of vision, he resembled those
      fastidious saints who guard the portals of a French cathedral. Well
      educated, well endowed, and not deficient physically, he remained in the
      grip of a certain devil whom the modern world knows as self-consciousness,
      and whom the medieval, with dimmer vision, worshipped as asceticism. A
      Gothic statue implies celibacy, just as a Greek statue implies fruition,
      and perhaps this was what Mr. Beebe meant. And Freddy, who ignored history
      and art, perhaps meant the same when he failed to imagine Cecil wearing
      another fellow&rsquo;s cap.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Honeychurch left her letter on the writing table and moved towards
      her young acquaintance.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Cecil!&rdquo; she exclaimed&mdash;&ldquo;oh, Cecil, do tell me!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I promessi sposi,&rdquo; said he.
    </p>
    <p>
      They stared at him anxiously.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She has accepted me,&rdquo; he said, and the sound of the thing in English made
      him flush and smile with pleasure, and look more human.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am so glad,&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch, while Freddy proffered a hand that
      was yellow with chemicals. They wished that they also knew Italian, for
      our phrases of approval and of amazement are so connected with little
      occasions that we fear to use them on great ones. We are obliged to become
      vaguely poetic, or to take refuge in Scriptural reminiscences.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Welcome as one of the family!&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch, waving her hand at
      the furniture. &ldquo;This is indeed a joyous day! I feel sure that you will
      make our dear Lucy happy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hope so,&rdquo; replied the young man, shifting his eyes to the ceiling.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We mothers&mdash;&rdquo; simpered Mrs. Honeychurch, and then realized that she
      was affected, sentimental, bombastic&mdash;all the things she hated most.
      Why could she not be Freddy, who stood stiff in the middle of the room;
      looking very cross and almost handsome?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I say, Lucy!&rdquo; called Cecil, for conversation seemed to flag.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy rose from the seat. She moved across the lawn and smiled in at them,
      just as if she was going to ask them to play tennis. Then she saw her
      brother&rsquo;s face. Her lips parted, and she took him in her arms. He said,
      &ldquo;Steady on!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not a kiss for me?&rdquo; asked her mother.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy kissed her also.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Would you take them into the garden and tell Mrs. Honeychurch all about
      it?&rdquo; Cecil suggested. &ldquo;And I&rsquo;d stop here and tell my mother.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We go with Lucy?&rdquo; said Freddy, as if taking orders.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, you go with Lucy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They passed into the sunlight. Cecil watched them cross the terrace, and
      descend out of sight by the steps. They would descend&mdash;he knew their
      ways&mdash;past the shrubbery, and past the tennis-lawn and the
      dahlia-bed, until they reached the kitchen garden, and there, in the
      presence of the potatoes and the peas, the great event would be discussed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Smiling indulgently, he lit a cigarette, and rehearsed the events that had
      led to such a happy conclusion.
    </p>
    <p>
      He had known Lucy for several years, but only as a commonplace girl who
      happened to be musical. He could still remember his depression that
      afternoon at Rome, when she and her terrible cousin fell on him out of the
      blue, and demanded to be taken to St. Peter&rsquo;s. That day she had seemed a
      typical tourist&mdash;shrill, crude, and gaunt with travel. But Italy
      worked some marvel in her. It gave her light, and&mdash;which he held more
      precious&mdash;it gave her shadow. Soon he detected in her a wonderful
      reticence. She was like a woman of Leonardo da Vinci&rsquo;s, whom we love not
      so much for herself as for the things that she will not tell us. The
      things are assuredly not of this life; no woman of Leonardo&rsquo;s could have
      anything so vulgar as a &ldquo;story.&rdquo; She did develop most wonderfully day by
      day.
    </p>
    <p>
      So it happened that from patronizing civility he had slowly passed if not
      to passion, at least to a profound uneasiness. Already at Rome he had
      hinted to her that they might be suitable for each other. It had touched
      him greatly that she had not broken away at the suggestion. Her refusal
      had been clear and gentle; after it&mdash;as the horrid phrase went&mdash;she
      had been exactly the same to him as before. Three months later, on the
      margin of Italy, among the flower-clad Alps, he had asked her again in
      bald, traditional language. She reminded him of a Leonardo more than ever;
      her sunburnt features were shadowed by fantastic rock; at his words she
      had turned and stood between him and the light with immeasurable plains
      behind her. He walked home with her unashamed, feeling not at all like a
      rejected suitor. The things that really mattered were unshaken.
    </p>
    <p>
      So now he had asked her once more, and, clear and gentle as ever, she had
      accepted him, giving no coy reasons for her delay, but simply saying that
      she loved him and would do her best to make him happy. His mother, too,
      would be pleased; she had counselled the step; he must write her a long
      account.
    </p>
    <p>
      Glancing at his hand, in case any of Freddy&rsquo;s chemicals had come off on
      it, he moved to the writing table. There he saw &ldquo;Dear Mrs. Vyse,&rdquo; followed
      by many erasures. He recoiled without reading any more, and after a little
      hesitation sat down elsewhere, and pencilled a note on his knee.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then he lit another cigarette, which did not seem quite as divine as the
      first, and considered what might be done to make Windy Corner drawing-room
      more distinctive. With that outlook it should have been a successful room,
      but the trail of Tottenham Court Road was upon it; he could almost
      visualize the motor-vans of Messrs. Shoolbred and Messrs. Maple arriving
      at the door and depositing this chair, those varnished book-cases, that
      writing-table. The table recalled Mrs. Honeychurch&rsquo;s letter. He did not
      want to read that letter&mdash;his temptations never lay in that
      direction; but he worried about it none the less. It was his own fault
      that she was discussing him with his mother; he had wanted her support in
      his third attempt to win Lucy; he wanted to feel that others, no matter
      who they were, agreed with him, and so he had asked their permission. Mrs.
      Honeychurch had been civil, but obtuse in essentials, while as for Freddy&mdash;&ldquo;He
      is only a boy,&rdquo; he reflected. &ldquo;I represent all that he despises. Why
      should he want me for a brother-in-law?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Honeychurches were a worthy family, but he began to realize that Lucy
      was of another clay; and perhaps&mdash;he did not put it very definitely&mdash;he
      ought to introduce her into more congenial circles as soon as possible.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Beebe!&rdquo; said the maid, and the new rector of Summer Street was shown
      in; he had at once started on friendly relations, owing to Lucy&rsquo;s praise
      of him in her letters from Florence.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil greeted him rather critically.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve come for tea, Mr. Vyse. Do you suppose that I shall get it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I should say so. Food is the thing one does get here&mdash;Don&rsquo;t sit in
      that chair; young Honeychurch has left a bone in it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Pfui!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know,&rdquo; said Cecil. &ldquo;I know. I can&rsquo;t think why Mrs. Honeychurch allows
      it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      For Cecil considered the bone and the Maples&rsquo; furniture separately; he did
      not realize that, taken together, they kindled the room into the life that
      he desired.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve come for tea and for gossip. Isn&rsquo;t this news?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;News? I don&rsquo;t understand you,&rdquo; said Cecil. &ldquo;News?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe, whose news was of a very different nature, prattled forward.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I met Sir Harry Otway as I came up; I have every reason to hope that I am
      first in the field. He has bought Cissie and Albert from Mr. Flack!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Has he indeed?&rdquo; said Cecil, trying to recover himself. Into what a
      grotesque mistake had he fallen! Was it likely that a clergyman and a
      gentleman would refer to his engagement in a manner so flippant? But his
      stiffness remained, and, though he asked who Cissie and Albert might be,
      he still thought Mr. Beebe rather a bounder.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Unpardonable question! To have stopped a week at Windy Corner and not to
      have met Cissie and Albert, the semi-detached villas that have been run up
      opposite the church! I&rsquo;ll set Mrs. Honeychurch after you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m shockingly stupid over local affairs,&rdquo; said the young man languidly.
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t even remember the difference between a Parish Council and a Local
      Government Board. Perhaps there is no difference, or perhaps those aren&rsquo;t
      the right names. I only go into the country to see my friends and to enjoy
      the scenery. It is very remiss of me. Italy and London are the only places
      where I don&rsquo;t feel to exist on sufferance.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe, distressed at this heavy reception of Cissie and Albert,
      determined to shift the subject.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let me see, Mr. Vyse&mdash;I forget&mdash;what is your profession?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have no profession,&rdquo; said Cecil. &ldquo;It is another example of my
      decadence. My attitude&mdash;quite an indefensible one&mdash;is that so long as
      I am no trouble to any one I have a right to do as I like. I know I ought
      to be getting money out of people, or devoting myself to things I don&rsquo;t
      care a straw about, but somehow, I&rsquo;ve not been able to begin.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are very fortunate,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe. &ldquo;It is a wonderful opportunity,
      the possession of leisure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      His voice was rather parochial, but he did not quite see his way to
      answering naturally. He felt, as all who have regular occupation must
      feel, that others should have it also.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am glad that you approve. I daren&rsquo;t face the healthy person&mdash;for
      example, Freddy Honeychurch.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Freddy&rsquo;s a good sort, isn&rsquo;t he?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Admirable. The sort who has made England what she is.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil wondered at himself. Why, on this day of all others, was he so
      hopelessly contrary? He tried to get right by inquiring effusively after
      Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s mother, an old lady for whom he had no particular regard. Then
      he flattered the clergyman, praised his liberal-mindedness, his
      enlightened attitude towards philosophy and science.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where are the others?&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe at last, &ldquo;I insist on extracting
      tea before evening service.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suppose Anne never told them you were here. In this house one is so
      coached in the servants the day one arrives. The fault of Anne is that she
      begs your pardon when she hears you perfectly, and kicks the chair-legs
      with her feet. The faults of Mary&mdash;I forget the faults of Mary, but
      they are very grave. Shall we look in the garden?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know the faults of Mary. She leaves the dust-pans standing on the
      stairs.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The fault of Euphemia is that she will not, simply will not, chop the
      suet sufficiently small.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They both laughed, and things began to go better.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The faults of Freddy&mdash;&rdquo; Cecil continued.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, he has too many. No one but his mother can remember the faults of
      Freddy. Try the faults of Miss Honeychurch; they are not innumerable.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She has none,&rdquo; said the young man, with grave sincerity.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I quite agree. At present she has none.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;At present?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not cynical. I&rsquo;m only thinking of my pet theory about Miss
      Honeychurch. Does it seem reasonable that she should play so wonderfully,
      and live so quietly? I suspect that one day she will be wonderful in both.
      The water-tight compartments in her will break down, and music and life
      will mingle. Then we shall have her heroically good, heroically bad&mdash;too
      heroic, perhaps, to be good or bad.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil found his companion interesting.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And at present you think her not wonderful as far as life goes?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I must say I&rsquo;ve only seen her at Tunbridge Wells, where she was not
      wonderful, and at Florence. Since I came to Summer Street she has been
      away. You saw her, didn&rsquo;t you, at Rome and in the Alps. Oh, I forgot; of
      course, you knew her before. No, she wasn&rsquo;t wonderful in Florence either,
      but I kept on expecting that she would be.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In what way?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Conversation had become agreeable to them, and they were pacing up and
      down the terrace.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I could as easily tell you what tune she&rsquo;ll play next. There was simply
      the sense that she had found wings, and meant to use them. I can show you
      a beautiful picture in my Italian diary: Miss Honeychurch as a kite, Miss
      Bartlett holding the string. Picture number two: the string breaks.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The sketch was in his diary, but it had been made afterwards, when he
      viewed things artistically. At the time he had given surreptitious tugs to
      the string himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But the string never broke?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No. I mightn&rsquo;t have seen Miss Honeychurch rise, but I should certainly
      have heard Miss Bartlett fall.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It has broken now,&rdquo; said the young man in low, vibrating tones.
    </p>
    <p>
      Immediately he realized that of all the conceited, ludicrous, contemptible
      ways of announcing an engagement this was the worst. He cursed his love of
      metaphor; had he suggested that he was a star and that Lucy was soaring up
      to reach him?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Broken? What do you mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I meant,&rdquo; said Cecil stiffly, &ldquo;that she is going to marry me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The clergyman was conscious of some bitter disappointment which he could
      not keep out of his voice.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am sorry; I must apologize. I had no idea you were intimate with her,
      or I should never have talked in this flippant, superficial way. Mr. Vyse,
      you ought to have stopped me.&rdquo; And down the garden he saw Lucy herself;
      yes, he was disappointed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil, who naturally preferred congratulations to apologies, drew down his
      mouth at the corners. Was this the reception his action would get from the
      world? Of course, he despised the world as a whole; every thoughtful man
      should; it is almost a test of refinement. But he was sensitive to the
      successive particles of it which he encountered.
    </p>
    <p>
      Occasionally he could be quite crude.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am sorry I have given you a shock,&rdquo; he said dryly. &ldquo;I fear that Lucy&rsquo;s
      choice does not meet with your approval.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not that. But you ought to have stopped me. I know Miss Honeychurch only
      a little as time goes. Perhaps I oughtn&rsquo;t to have discussed her so freely
      with any one; certainly not with you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are conscious of having said something indiscreet?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe pulled himself together. Really, Mr. Vyse had the art of placing
      one in the most tiresome positions. He was driven to use the prerogatives
      of his profession.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I have said nothing indiscreet. I foresaw at Florence that her quiet,
      uneventful childhood must end, and it has ended. I realized dimly enough
      that she might take some momentous step. She has taken it. She has learnt&mdash;you
      will let me talk freely, as I have begun freely&mdash;she has learnt what
      it is to love: the greatest lesson, some people will tell you, that our
      earthly life provides.&rdquo; It was now time for him to wave his hat at the
      approaching trio. He did not omit to do so. &ldquo;She has learnt through you,&rdquo;
       and if his voice was still clerical, it was now also sincere; &ldquo;let it be
      your care that her knowledge is profitable to her.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Grazie tante!&rdquo; said Cecil, who did not like parsons.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have you heard?&rdquo; shouted Mrs. Honeychurch as she toiled up the sloping
      garden. &ldquo;Oh, Mr. Beebe, have you heard the news?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Freddy, now full of geniality, whistled the wedding march. Youth seldom
      criticizes the accomplished fact.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Indeed I have!&rdquo; he cried. He looked at Lucy. In her presence he could not
      act the parson any longer&mdash;at all events not without apology. &ldquo;Mrs.
      Honeychurch, I&rsquo;m going to do what I am always supposed to do, but
      generally I&rsquo;m too shy. I want to invoke every kind of blessing on them,
      grave and gay, great and small. I want them all their lives to be
      supremely good and supremely happy as husband and wife, as father and
      mother. And now I want my tea.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You only asked for it just in time,&rdquo; the lady retorted. &ldquo;How dare you be
      serious at Windy Corner?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He took his tone from her. There was no more heavy beneficence, no more
      attempts to dignify the situation with poetry or the Scriptures. None of
      them dared or was able to be serious any more.
    </p>
    <p>
      An engagement is so potent a thing that sooner or later it reduces all who
      speak of it to this state of cheerful awe. Away from it, in the solitude
      of their rooms, Mr. Beebe, and even Freddy, might again be critical. But
      in its presence and in the presence of each other they were sincerely
      hilarious. It has a strange power, for it compels not only the lips, but
      the very heart. The chief parallel to compare one great thing with another&mdash;is
      the power over us of a temple of some alien creed. Standing outside, we
      deride or oppose it, or at the most feel sentimental. Inside, though the
      saints and gods are not ours, we become true believers, in case any true
      believer should be present.
    </p>
    <p>
      So it was that after the gropings and the misgivings of the afternoon they
      pulled themselves together and settled down to a very pleasant tea-party.
      If they were hypocrites they did not know it, and their hypocrisy had
      every chance of setting and of becoming true. Anne, putting down each
      plate as if it were a wedding present, stimulated them greatly. They could
      not lag behind that smile of hers which she gave them ere she kicked the
      drawing-room door. Mr. Beebe chirruped. Freddy was at his wittiest,
      referring to Cecil as the &ldquo;Fiasco&rdquo;&mdash;family honoured pun on fiance.
      Mrs. Honeychurch, amusing and portly, promised well as a mother-in-law. As
      for Lucy and Cecil, for whom the temple had been built, they also joined
      in the merry ritual, but waited, as earnest worshippers should, for the
      disclosure of some holier shrine of joy.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0009" id="link2HCH0009">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter IX: Lucy As a Work of Art
    </h2>
    <p>
      A few days after the engagement was announced Mrs. Honeychurch made Lucy
      and her Fiasco come to a little garden-party in the neighbourhood, for
      naturally she wanted to show people that her daughter was marrying a
      presentable man.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil was more than presentable; he looked distinguished, and it was very
      pleasant to see his slim figure keeping step with Lucy, and his long, fair
      face responding when Lucy spoke to him. People congratulated Mrs.
      Honeychurch, which is, I believe, a social blunder, but it pleased her,
      and she introduced Cecil rather indiscriminately to some stuffy dowagers.
    </p>
    <p>
      At tea a misfortune took place: a cup of coffee was upset over Lucy&rsquo;s
      figured silk, and though Lucy feigned indifference, her mother feigned
      nothing of the sort but dragged her indoors to have the frock treated by a
      sympathetic maid. They were gone some time, and Cecil was left with the
      dowagers. When they returned he was not as pleasant as he had been.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you go to much of this sort of thing?&rdquo; he asked when they were driving
      home.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, now and then,&rdquo; said Lucy, who had rather enjoyed herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is it typical of country society?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suppose so. Mother, would it be?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Plenty of society,&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch, who was trying to remember the
      hang of one of the dresses.
    </p>
    <p>
      Seeing that her thoughts were elsewhere, Cecil bent towards Lucy and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To me it seemed perfectly appalling, disastrous, portentous.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am so sorry that you were stranded.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not that, but the congratulations. It is so disgusting, the way an
      engagement is regarded as public property&mdash;a kind of waste place
      where every outsider may shoot his vulgar sentiment. All those old women
      smirking!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;One has to go through it, I suppose. They won&rsquo;t notice us so much next
      time.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But my point is that their whole attitude is wrong. An engagement&mdash;horrid
      word in the first place&mdash;is a private matter, and should be treated
      as such.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Yet the smirking old women, however wrong individually, were racially
      correct. The spirit of the generations had smiled through them, rejoicing
      in the engagement of Cecil and Lucy because it promised the continuance of
      life on earth. To Cecil and Lucy it promised something quite different&mdash;personal
      love. Hence Cecil&rsquo;s irritation and Lucy&rsquo;s belief that his irritation was
      just.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How tiresome!&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Couldn&rsquo;t you have escaped to tennis?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t play tennis&mdash;at least, not in public. The neighbourhood is
      deprived of the romance of me being athletic. Such romance as I have is
      that of the Inglese Italianato.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Inglese Italianato?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;E un diavolo incarnato! You know the proverb?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She did not. Nor did it seem applicable to a young man who had spent a
      quiet winter in Rome with his mother. But Cecil, since his engagement, had
      taken to affect a cosmopolitan naughtiness which he was far from
      possessing.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;I cannot help it if they do disapprove of me. There are
      certain irremovable barriers between myself and them, and I must accept
      them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We all have our limitations, I suppose,&rdquo; said wise Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sometimes they are forced on us, though,&rdquo; said Cecil, who saw from her
      remark that she did not quite understand his position.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It makes a difference doesn&rsquo;t it, whether we fully fence ourselves in, or
      whether we are fenced out by the barriers of others?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She thought a moment, and agreed that it did make a difference.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Difference?&rdquo; cried Mrs. Honeychurch, suddenly alert. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t see any
      difference. Fences are fences, especially when they are in the same
      place.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We were speaking of motives,&rdquo; said Cecil, on whom the interruption
      jarred.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear Cecil, look here.&rdquo; She spread out her knees and perched her
      card-case on her lap. &ldquo;This is me. That&rsquo;s Windy Corner. The rest of the
      pattern is the other people. Motives are all very well, but the fence
      comes here.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We weren&rsquo;t talking of real fences,&rdquo; said Lucy, laughing.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, I see, dear&mdash;poetry.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She leant placidly back. Cecil wondered why Lucy had been amused.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I tell you who has no &lsquo;fences,&rsquo; as you call them,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;and that&rsquo;s
      Mr. Beebe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A parson fenceless would mean a parson defenceless.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy was slow to follow what people said, but quick enough to detect what
      they meant. She missed Cecil&rsquo;s epigram, but grasped the feeling that
      prompted it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you like Mr. Beebe?&rdquo; she asked thoughtfully.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I never said so!&rdquo; he cried. &ldquo;I consider him far above the average. I only
      denied&mdash;&rdquo; And he swept off on the subject of fences again, and was
      brilliant.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now, a clergyman that I do hate,&rdquo; said she wanting to say something
      sympathetic, &ldquo;a clergyman that does have fences, and the most dreadful
      ones, is Mr. Eager, the English chaplain at Florence. He was truly
      insincere&mdash;not merely the manner unfortunate. He was a snob, and so
      conceited, and he did say such unkind things.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What sort of things?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There was an old man at the Bertolini whom he said had murdered his
      wife.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps he had.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why &lsquo;no&rsquo;?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He was such a nice old man, I&rsquo;m sure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil laughed at her feminine inconsequence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I did try to sift the thing. Mr. Eager would never come to the
      point. He prefers it vague&mdash;said the old man had &lsquo;practically&rsquo;
      murdered his wife&mdash;had murdered her in the sight of God.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hush, dear!&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch absently.
</p>
    <p>
&ldquo;But isn&rsquo;t it intolerable
      that a person whom we&rsquo;re told to imitate should go round spreading
      slander? It was, I believe, chiefly owing to him that the old man was
      dropped. People pretended he was vulgar, but he certainly wasn&rsquo;t that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Poor old man! What was his name?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Harris,&rdquo; said Lucy glibly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s hope that Mrs. Harris there warn&rsquo;t no sich person,&rdquo; said her
      mother.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil nodded intelligently.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t Mr. Eager a parson of the cultured type?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know. I hate him. I&rsquo;ve heard him lecture on Giotto. I hate him.
      Nothing can hide a petty nature. I HATE him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My goodness gracious me, child!&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch. &ldquo;You&rsquo;ll blow my
      head off! Whatever is there to shout over? I forbid you and Cecil to hate
      any more clergymen.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He smiled. There was indeed something rather incongruous in Lucy&rsquo;s moral
      outburst over Mr. Eager. It was as if one should see the Leonardo on the
      ceiling of the Sistine. He longed to hint to her that not here lay her
      vocation; that a woman&rsquo;s power and charm reside in mystery, not in
      muscular rant. But possibly rant is a sign of vitality: it mars the
      beautiful creature, but shows that she is alive. After a moment, he
      contemplated her flushed face and excited gestures with a certain
      approval. He forebore to repress the sources of youth.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nature&mdash;simplest of topics, he thought&mdash;lay around them. He
      praised the pine-woods, the deep lasts of bracken, the crimson leaves that
      spotted the hurt-bushes, the serviceable beauty of the turnpike road. The
      outdoor world was not very familiar to him, and occasionally he went wrong
      in a question of fact. Mrs. Honeychurch&rsquo;s mouth twitched when he spoke of
      the perpetual green of the larch.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I count myself a lucky person,&rdquo; he concluded, &ldquo;When I&rsquo;m in London I feel
      I could never live out of it. When I&rsquo;m in the country I feel the same
      about the country. After all, I do believe that birds and trees and the
      sky are the most wonderful things in life, and that the people who live
      amongst them must be the best. It&rsquo;s true that in nine cases out of ten
      they don&rsquo;t seem to notice anything. The country gentleman and the country
      labourer are each in their way the most depressing of companions. Yet they
      may have a tacit sympathy with the workings of Nature which is denied to
      us of the town. Do you feel that, Mrs. Honeychurch?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Honeychurch started and smiled. She had not been attending. Cecil,
      who was rather crushed on the front seat of the victoria, felt irritable,
      and determined not to say anything interesting again.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy had not attended either. Her brow was wrinkled, and she still looked
      furiously cross&mdash;the result, he concluded, of too much moral
      gymnastics. It was sad to see her thus blind to the beauties of an August
      wood.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Come down, O maid, from yonder mountain height,&rsquo;&rdquo; he quoted, and touched
      her knee with his own.
    </p>
    <p>
      She flushed again and said: &ldquo;What height?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Come down, O maid, from yonder mountain height, What pleasure lives in
      height (the shepherd sang). In height and in the splendour of the hills?&rsquo;
      Let us take Mrs. Honeychurch&rsquo;s advice and hate clergymen no more. What&rsquo;s
      this place?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Summer Street, of course,&rdquo; said Lucy, and roused herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      The woods had opened to leave space for a sloping triangular meadow.
      Pretty cottages lined it on two sides, and the upper and third side was
      occupied by a new stone church, expensively simple, a charming shingled
      spire. Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s house was near the church. In height it scarcely
      exceeded the cottages. Some great mansions were at hand, but they were
      hidden in the trees. The scene suggested a Swiss Alp rather than the
      shrine and centre of a leisured world, and was marred only by two ugly
      little villas&mdash;the villas that had competed with Cecil&rsquo;s engagement,
      having been acquired by Sir Harry Otway the very afternoon that Lucy had
      been acquired by Cecil.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cissie&rdquo; was the name of one of these villas, &ldquo;Albert&rdquo; of the other. These
      titles were not only picked out in shaded Gothic on the garden gates, but
      appeared a second time on the porches, where they followed the
      semicircular curve of the entrance arch in block capitals. &ldquo;Albert&rdquo; was
      inhabited. His tortured garden was bright with geraniums and lobelias and
      polished shells. His little windows were chastely swathed in Nottingham
      lace. &ldquo;Cissie&rdquo; was to let. Three notice-boards, belonging to Dorking
      agents, lolled on her fence and announced the not surprising fact. Her
      paths were already weedy; her pocket-handkerchief of a lawn was yellow
      with dandelions.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The place is ruined!&rdquo; said the ladies mechanically. &ldquo;Summer Street will
      never be the same again.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      As the carriage passed, &ldquo;Cissie&rsquo;s&rdquo; door opened, and a gentleman came out
      of her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Stop!&rdquo; cried Mrs. Honeychurch, touching the coachman with her parasol.
      &ldquo;Here&rsquo;s Sir Harry. Now we shall know. Sir Harry, pull those things down at
      once!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Sir Harry Otway&mdash;who need not be described&mdash;came to the carriage
      and said &ldquo;Mrs. Honeychurch, I meant to. I can&rsquo;t, I really can&rsquo;t turn out
      Miss Flack.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Am I not always right? She ought to have gone before the contract was
      signed. Does she still live rent free, as she did in her nephew&rsquo;s time?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But what can I do?&rdquo; He lowered his voice. &ldquo;An old lady, so very vulgar,
      and almost bedridden.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Turn her out,&rdquo; said Cecil bravely.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sir Harry sighed, and looked at the villas mournfully. He had had full
      warning of Mr. Flack&rsquo;s intentions, and might have bought the plot before
      building commenced: but he was apathetic and dilatory. He had known Summer
      Street for so many years that he could not imagine it being spoilt. Not
      till Mrs. Flack had laid the foundation stone, and the apparition of red
      and cream brick began to rise did he take alarm. He called on Mr. Flack,
      the local builder,&mdash;a most reasonable and respectful man&mdash;who
      agreed that tiles would have made more artistic roof, but pointed out that
      slates were cheaper. He ventured to differ, however, about the Corinthian
      columns which were to cling like leeches to the frames of the bow windows,
      saying that, for his part, he liked to relieve the facade by a bit of
      decoration. Sir Harry hinted that a column, if possible, should be
      structural as well as decorative.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Flack replied that all the columns had been ordered, adding, &ldquo;and all
      the capitals different&mdash;one with dragons in the foliage, another
      approaching to the Ionian style, another introducing Mrs. Flack&rsquo;s initials&mdash;every
      one different.&rdquo; For he had read his Ruskin. He built his villas according
      to his desire; and not until he had inserted an immovable aunt into one of
      them did Sir Harry buy.
    </p>
    <p>
      This futile and unprofitable transaction filled the knight with sadness as
      he leant on Mrs. Honeychurch&rsquo;s carriage. He had failed in his duties to
      the country-side, and the country-side was laughing at him as well. He had
      spent money, and yet Summer Street was spoilt as much as ever. All he
      could do now was to find a desirable tenant for &ldquo;Cissie&rdquo;&mdash;someone
      really desirable.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The rent is absurdly low,&rdquo; he told them, &ldquo;and perhaps I am an easy
      landlord. But it is such an awkward size. It is too large for the peasant
      class and too small for any one the least like ourselves.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil had been hesitating whether he should despise the villas or despise
      Sir Harry for despising them. The latter impulse seemed the more fruitful.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You ought to find a tenant at once,&rdquo; he said maliciously. &ldquo;It would be a
      perfect paradise for a bank clerk.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Exactly!&rdquo; said Sir Harry excitedly. &ldquo;That is exactly what I fear, Mr.
      Vyse. It will attract the wrong type of people. The train service has
      improved&mdash;a fatal improvement, to my mind. And what are five miles
      from a station in these days of bicycles?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Rather a strenuous clerk it would be,&rdquo; said Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil, who had his full share of mediaeval mischievousness, replied that
      the physique of the lower middle classes was improving at a most appalling
      rate. She saw that he was laughing at their harmless neighbour, and roused
      herself to stop him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sir Harry!&rdquo; she exclaimed, &ldquo;I have an idea. How would you like
      spinsters?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear Lucy, it would be splendid. Do you know any such?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes; I met them abroad.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Gentlewomen?&rdquo; he asked tentatively.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, indeed, and at the present moment homeless. I heard from them last
      week&mdash;Miss Teresa and Miss Catharine Alan. I&rsquo;m really not joking.
      They are quite the right people. Mr. Beebe knows them, too. May I tell
      them to write to you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Indeed you may!&rdquo; he cried. &ldquo;Here we are with the difficulty solved
      already. How delightful it is! Extra facilities&mdash;please tell them
      they shall have extra facilities, for I shall have no agents&rsquo; fees. Oh,
      the agents! The appalling people they have sent me! One woman, when I
      wrote&mdash;a tactful letter, you know&mdash;asking her to explain her
      social position to me, replied that she would pay the rent in advance. As
      if one cares about that! And several references I took up were most
      unsatisfactory&mdash;people swindlers, or not respectable. And oh, the
      deceit! I have seen a good deal of the seamy side this last week. The
      deceit of the most promising people. My dear Lucy, the deceit!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She nodded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My advice,&rdquo; put in Mrs. Honeychurch, &ldquo;is to have nothing to do with Lucy
      and her decayed gentlewomen at all. I know the type. Preserve me from
      people who have seen better days, and bring heirlooms with them that make
      the house smell stuffy. It&rsquo;s a sad thing, but I&rsquo;d far rather let to some
      one who is going up in the world than to someone who has come down.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think I follow you,&rdquo; said Sir Harry; &ldquo;but it is, as you say, a very sad
      thing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Misses Alan aren&rsquo;t that!&rdquo; cried Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, they are,&rdquo; said Cecil. &ldquo;I haven&rsquo;t met them but I should say they
      were a highly unsuitable addition to the neighbourhood.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t listen to him, Sir Harry&mdash;he&rsquo;s tiresome.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s I who am tiresome,&rdquo; he replied. &ldquo;I oughtn&rsquo;t to come with my troubles
      to young people. But really I am so worried, and Lady Otway will only say
      that I cannot be too careful, which is quite true, but no real help.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then may I write to my Misses Alan?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Please!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But his eye wavered when Mrs. Honeychurch exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Beware! They are certain to have canaries. Sir Harry, beware of canaries:
      they spit the seed out through the bars of the cages and then the mice
      come. Beware of women altogether. Only let to a man.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Really&mdash;&rdquo; he murmured gallantly, though he saw the wisdom of her
      remark.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Men don&rsquo;t gossip over tea-cups. If they get drunk, there&rsquo;s an end of them&mdash;they
      lie down comfortably and sleep it off. If they&rsquo;re vulgar, they somehow
      keep it to themselves. It doesn&rsquo;t spread so. Give me a man&mdash;of
      course, provided he&rsquo;s clean.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Sir Harry blushed. Neither he nor Cecil enjoyed these open compliments to
      their sex. Even the exclusion of the dirty did not leave them much
      distinction. He suggested that Mrs. Honeychurch, if she had time, should
      descend from the carriage and inspect &ldquo;Cissie&rdquo; for herself. She was
      delighted. Nature had intended her to be poor and to live in such a house.
      Domestic arrangements always attracted her, especially when they were on a
      small scale.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil pulled Lucy back as she followed her mother.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mrs. Honeychurch,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;what if we two walk home and leave you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Certainly!&rdquo; was her cordial reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sir Harry likewise seemed almost too glad to get rid of them. He beamed at
      them knowingly, said, &ldquo;Aha! young people, young people!&rdquo; and then hastened
      to unlock the house.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hopeless vulgarian!&rdquo; exclaimed Cecil, almost before they were out of
      earshot.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Cecil!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t help it. It would be wrong not to loathe that man.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He isn&rsquo;t clever, but really he is nice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, Lucy, he stands for all that is bad in country life. In London he
      would keep his place. He would belong to a brainless club, and his wife
      would give brainless dinner parties. But down here he acts the little god
      with his gentility, and his patronage, and his sham aesthetics, and every
      one&mdash;even your mother&mdash;is taken in.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All that you say is quite true,&rdquo; said Lucy, though she felt discouraged.
      &ldquo;I wonder whether&mdash;whether it matters so very much.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It matters supremely. Sir Harry is the essence of that garden-party. Oh,
      goodness, how cross I feel! How I do hope he&rsquo;ll get some vulgar tenant in
      that villa&mdash;some woman so really vulgar that he&rsquo;ll notice it.
      GENTLEFOLKS! Ugh! with his bald head and retreating chin! But let&rsquo;s forget
      him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      This Lucy was glad enough to do. If Cecil disliked Sir Harry Otway and Mr.
      Beebe, what guarantee was there that the people who really mattered to her
      would escape? For instance, Freddy. Freddy was neither clever, nor subtle,
      nor beautiful, and what prevented Cecil from saying, any minute, &ldquo;It would
      be wrong not to loathe Freddy&rdquo;? And what would she reply? Further than
      Freddy she did not go, but he gave her anxiety enough. She could only
      assure herself that Cecil had known Freddy some time, and that they had
      always got on pleasantly, except, perhaps, during the last few days, which
      was an accident, perhaps.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Which way shall we go?&rdquo; she asked him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nature&mdash;simplest of topics, she thought&mdash;was around them. Summer
      Street lay deep in the woods, and she had stopped where a footpath
      diverged from the highroad.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Are there two ways?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps the road is more sensible, as we&rsquo;re got up smart.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;d rather go through the wood,&rdquo; said Cecil, With that subdued irritation
      that she had noticed in him all the afternoon. &ldquo;Why is it, Lucy, that you
      always say the road? Do you know that you have never once been with me in
      the fields or the wood since we were engaged?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Haven&rsquo;t I? The wood, then,&rdquo; said Lucy, startled at his queerness, but
      pretty sure that he would explain later; it was not his habit to leave her
      in doubt as to his meaning.
    </p>
    <p>
      She led the way into the whispering pines, and sure enough he did explain
      before they had gone a dozen yards.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I had got an idea&mdash;I dare say wrongly&mdash;that you feel more at
      home with me in a room.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A room?&rdquo; she echoed, hopelessly bewildered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes. Or, at the most, in a garden, or on a road. Never in the real
      country like this.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Cecil, whatever do you mean? I have never felt anything of the sort.
      You talk as if I was a kind of poetess sort of person.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know that you aren&rsquo;t. I connect you with a view&mdash;a certain
      type of view. Why shouldn&rsquo;t you connect me with a room?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She reflected a moment, and then said, laughing:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you know that you&rsquo;re right? I do. I must be a poetess after all. When
      I think of you it&rsquo;s always as in a room. How funny!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      To her surprise, he seemed annoyed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A drawing-room, pray? With no view?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, with no view, I fancy. Why not?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;d rather,&rdquo; he said reproachfully, &ldquo;that you connected me with the open
      air.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She said again, &ldquo;Oh, Cecil, whatever do you mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      As no explanation was forthcoming, she shook off the subject as too
      difficult for a girl, and led him further into the wood, pausing every now
      and then at some particularly beautiful or familiar combination of the
      trees. She had known the wood between Summer Street and Windy Corner ever
      since she could walk alone; she had played at losing Freddy in it, when
      Freddy was a purple-faced baby; and though she had been to Italy, it had
      lost none of its charm.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently they came to a little clearing among the pines&mdash;another
      tiny green alp, solitary this time, and holding in its bosom a shallow
      pool.
    </p>
    <p>
      She exclaimed, &ldquo;The Sacred Lake!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why do you call it that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t remember why. I suppose it comes out of some book. It&rsquo;s only a
      puddle now, but you see that stream going through it? Well, a good deal of
      water comes down after heavy rains, and can&rsquo;t get away at once, and the
      pool becomes quite large and beautiful. Then Freddy used to bathe there.
      He is very fond of it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He meant, &ldquo;Are you fond of it?&rdquo; But she answered dreamily, &ldquo;I bathed here,
      too, till I was found out. Then there was a row.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At another time he might have been shocked, for he had depths of
      prudishness within him. But now? with his momentary cult of the fresh air,
      he was delighted at her admirable simplicity. He looked at her as she
      stood by the pool&rsquo;s edge. She was got up smart, as she phrased it, and she
      reminded him of some brilliant flower that has no leaves of its own, but
      blooms abruptly out of a world of green.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who found you out?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Charlotte,&rdquo; she murmured. &ldquo;She was stopping with us. Charlotte&mdash;Charlotte.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Poor girl!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She smiled gravely. A certain scheme, from which hitherto he had shrunk,
      now appeared practical.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I suppose we ought to be going,&rdquo; was her reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy, I want to ask something of you that I have never asked before.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At the serious note in his voice she stepped frankly and kindly towards
      him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What, Cecil?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hitherto never&mdash;not even that day on the lawn when you agreed to
      marry me&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He became self-conscious and kept glancing round to see if they were
      observed. His courage had gone.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Up to now I have never kissed you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She was as scarlet as if he had put the thing most indelicately.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;more you have,&rdquo; she stammered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then I ask you&mdash;may I now?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course, you may, Cecil. You might before. I can&rsquo;t run at you, you
      know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At that supreme moment he was conscious of nothing but absurdities. Her
      reply was inadequate. She gave such a business-like lift to her veil. As
      he approached her he found time to wish that he could recoil. As he
      touched her, his gold pince-nez became dislodged and was flattened between
      them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Such was the embrace. He considered, with truth, that it had been a
      failure. Passion should believe itself irresistible. It should forget
      civility and consideration and all the other curses of a refined nature.
      Above all, it should never ask for leave where there is a right of way.
      Why could he not do as any labourer or navvy&mdash;nay, as any young man
      behind the counter would have done? He recast the scene. Lucy was standing
      flowerlike by the water, he rushed up and took her in his arms; she
      rebuked him, permitted him and revered him ever after for his manliness.
      For he believed that women revere men for their manliness.
    </p>
    <p>
      They left the pool in silence, after this one salutation. He waited for
      her to make some remark which should show him her inmost thoughts. At last
      she spoke, and with fitting gravity.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Emerson was the name, not Harris.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What name?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The old man&rsquo;s.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What old man?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That old man I told you about. The one Mr. Eager was so unkind to.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He could not know that this was the most intimate conversation they had
      ever had.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0010" id="link2HCH0010">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter X: Cecil as a Humourist
    </h2>
    <p>
      The society out of which Cecil proposed to rescue Lucy was perhaps no very
      splendid affair, yet it was more splendid than her antecedents entitled
      her to. Her father, a prosperous local solicitor, had built Windy Corner,
      as a speculation at the time the district was opening up, and, falling in
      love with his own creation, had ended by living there himself. Soon after
      his marriage the social atmosphere began to alter. Other houses were built
      on the brow of that steep southern slope and others, again, among the
      pine-trees behind, and northward on the chalk barrier of the downs. Most
      of these houses were larger than Windy Corner, and were filled by people
      who came, not from the district, but from London, and who mistook the
      Honeychurches for the remnants of an indigenous aristocracy. He was
      inclined to be frightened, but his wife accepted the situation without
      either pride or humility. &ldquo;I cannot think what people are doing,&rdquo; she
      would say, &ldquo;but it is extremely fortunate for the children.&rdquo; She called
      everywhere; her calls were returned with enthusiasm, and by the time
      people found out that she was not exactly of their milieu, they liked her,
      and it did not seem to matter. When Mr. Honeychurch died, he had the
      satisfaction&mdash;which few honest solicitors despise&mdash;of leaving
      his family rooted in the best society obtainable.
    </p>
    <p>
      The best obtainable. Certainly many of the immigrants were rather dull,
      and Lucy realized this more vividly since her return from Italy. Hitherto
      she had accepted their ideals without questioning&mdash;their kindly
      affluence, their inexplosive religion, their dislike of paper-bags,
      orange-peel, and broken bottles. A Radical out and out, she learnt to
      speak with horror of Suburbia. Life, so far as she troubled to conceive
      it, was a circle of rich, pleasant people, with identical interests and
      identical foes. In this circle, one thought, married, and died. Outside it
      were poverty and vulgarity for ever trying to enter, just as the London
      fog tries to enter the pine-woods pouring through the gaps in the northern
      hills. But, in Italy, where any one who chooses may warm himself in
      equality, as in the sun, this conception of life vanished. Her senses
      expanded; she felt that there was no one whom she might not get to like,
      that social barriers were irremovable, doubtless, but not particularly
      high. You jump over them just as you jump into a peasant&rsquo;s olive-yard in
      the Apennines, and he is glad to see you. She returned with new eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      So did Cecil; but Italy had quickened Cecil, not to tolerance, but to
      irritation. He saw that the local society was narrow, but, instead of
      saying, &ldquo;Does that very much matter?&rdquo; he rebelled, and tried to substitute
      for it the society he called broad. He did not realize that Lucy had
      consecrated her environment by the thousand little civilities that create
      a tenderness in time, and that though her eyes saw its defects, her heart
      refused to despise it entirely. Nor did he realize a more important point&mdash;that
      if she was too great for this society, she was too great for all society,
      and had reached the stage where personal intercourse would alone satisfy
      her. A rebel she was, but not of the kind he understood&mdash;a rebel who
      desired, not a wider dwelling-room, but equality beside the man she loved.
      For Italy was offering her the most priceless of all possessions&mdash;her
      own soul.
    </p>
    <p>
      Playing bumble-puppy with Minnie Beebe, niece to the rector, and aged
      thirteen&mdash;an ancient and most honourable game, which consists in
      striking tennis-balls high into the air, so that they fall over the net
      and immoderately bounce; some hit Mrs. Honeychurch; others are lost. The
      sentence is confused, but the better illustrates Lucy&rsquo;s state of mind, for
      she was trying to talk to Mr. Beebe at the same time.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, it has been such a nuisance&mdash;first he, then they&mdash;no one
      knowing what they wanted, and everyone so tiresome.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But they really are coming now,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe. &ldquo;I wrote to Miss Teresa
      a few days ago&mdash;she was wondering how often the butcher called, and
      my reply of once a month must have impressed her favourably. They are
      coming. I heard from them this morning.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I shall hate those Miss Alans!&rdquo; Mrs. Honeychurch cried. &ldquo;Just because
      they&rsquo;re old and silly one&rsquo;s expected to say &lsquo;How sweet!&rsquo; I hate their
      &lsquo;if&rsquo;-ing and &lsquo;but&rsquo;-ing and &lsquo;and&rsquo;-ing. And poor Lucy&mdash;serve her right&mdash;worn
      to a shadow.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe watched the shadow springing and shouting over the tennis-court.
      Cecil was absent&mdash;one did not play bumble-puppy when he was there.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, if they are coming&mdash;No, Minnie, not Saturn.&rdquo; Saturn was a
      tennis-ball whose skin was partially unsewn. When in motion his orb was
      encircled by a ring. &ldquo;If they are coming, Sir Harry will let them move in
      before the twenty-ninth, and he will cross out the clause about
      whitewashing the ceilings, because it made them nervous, and put in the
      fair wear and tear one.&mdash;That doesn&rsquo;t count. I told you not Saturn.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Saturn&rsquo;s all right for bumble-puppy,&rdquo; cried Freddy, joining them.
      &ldquo;Minnie, don&rsquo;t you listen to her.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Saturn doesn&rsquo;t bounce.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Saturn bounces enough.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, he doesn&rsquo;t.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well; he bounces better than the Beautiful White Devil.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hush, dear,&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But look at Lucy&mdash;complaining of Saturn, and all the time&rsquo;s got the
      Beautiful White Devil in her hand, ready to plug it in. That&rsquo;s right,
      Minnie, go for her&mdash;get her over the shins with the racquet&mdash;get
      her over the shins!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy fell, the Beautiful White Devil rolled from her hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe picked it up, and said: &ldquo;The name of this ball is Vittoria
      Corombona, please.&rdquo; But his correction passed unheeded.
    </p>
    <p>
      Freddy possessed to a high degree the power of lashing little girls to
      fury, and in half a minute he had transformed Minnie from a well-mannered
      child into a howling wilderness. Up in the house Cecil heard them, and,
      though he was full of entertaining news, he did not come down to impart
      it, in case he got hurt. He was not a coward and bore necessary pain as
      well as any man. But he hated the physical violence of the young. How
      right it was! Sure enough it ended in a cry.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I wish the Miss Alans could see this,&rdquo; observed Mr. Beebe, just as Lucy,
      who was nursing the injured Minnie, was in turn lifted off her feet by her
      brother.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who are the Miss Alans?&rdquo; Freddy panted.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They have taken Cissie Villa.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That wasn&rsquo;t the name&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Here his foot slipped, and they all fell most agreeably on to the grass.
      An interval elapses.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wasn&rsquo;t what name?&rdquo; asked Lucy, with her brother&rsquo;s head in her lap.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Alan wasn&rsquo;t the name of the people Sir Harry&rsquo;s let to.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nonsense, Freddy! You know nothing about it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nonsense yourself! I&rsquo;ve this minute seen him. He said to me: &lsquo;Ahem!
      Honeychurch,&rsquo;&rdquo;&mdash;Freddy was an indifferent mimic&mdash;&ldquo;&lsquo;ahem! ahem! I
      have at last procured really dee-sire-rebel tenants.&rsquo; I said, &lsquo;ooray, old
      boy!&rsquo; and slapped him on the back.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Exactly. The Miss Alans?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Rather not. More like Anderson.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, good gracious, there isn&rsquo;t going to be another muddle!&rdquo; Mrs.
      Honeychurch exclaimed. &ldquo;Do you notice, Lucy, I&rsquo;m always right? I said
      don&rsquo;t interfere with Cissie Villa. I&rsquo;m always right. I&rsquo;m quite uneasy at
      being always right so often.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s only another muddle of Freddy&rsquo;s. Freddy doesn&rsquo;t even know the name
      of the people he pretends have taken it instead.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I do. I&rsquo;ve got it. Emerson.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What name?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Emerson. I&rsquo;ll bet you anything you like.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What a weathercock Sir Harry is,&rdquo; said Lucy quietly. &ldquo;I wish I had never
      bothered over it at all.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Then she lay on her back and gazed at the cloudless sky. Mr. Beebe, whose
      opinion of her rose daily, whispered to his niece that THAT was the proper
      way to behave if any little thing went wrong.
    </p>
    <p>
      Meanwhile the name of the new tenants had diverted Mrs. Honeychurch from
      the contemplation of her own abilities.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Emerson, Freddy? Do you know what Emersons they are?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know whether they&rsquo;re any Emersons,&rdquo; retorted Freddy, who was
      democratic. Like his sister and like most young people, he was naturally
      attracted by the idea of equality, and the undeniable fact that there are
      different kinds of Emersons annoyed him beyond measure.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I trust they are the right sort of person. All right, Lucy&rdquo;&mdash;she was
      sitting up again&mdash;&ldquo;I see you looking down your nose and thinking your
      mother&rsquo;s a snob. But there is a right sort and a wrong sort, and it&rsquo;s
      affectation to pretend there isn&rsquo;t.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Emerson&rsquo;s a common enough name,&rdquo; Lucy remarked.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was gazing sideways. Seated on a promontory herself, she could see the
      pine-clad promontories descending one beyond another into the Weald. The
      further one descended the garden, the more glorious was this lateral view.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I was merely going to remark, Freddy, that I trusted they were no
      relations of Emerson the philosopher, a most trying man. Pray, does that
      satisfy you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, yes,&rdquo; he grumbled. &ldquo;And you will be satisfied, too, for they&rsquo;re
      friends of Cecil; so&rdquo;&mdash;elaborate irony&mdash;&ldquo;you and the other
      country families will be able to call in perfect safety.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;CECIL?&rdquo; exclaimed Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t be rude, dear,&rdquo; said his mother placidly. &ldquo;Lucy, don&rsquo;t screech.
      It&rsquo;s a new bad habit you&rsquo;re getting into.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But has Cecil&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Friends of Cecil&rsquo;s,&rdquo; he repeated, &ldquo;&lsquo;and so really dee-sire-rebel. Ahem!
      Honeychurch, I have just telegraphed to them.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She got up from the grass.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was hard on Lucy. Mr. Beebe sympathized with her very much. While she
      believed that her snub about the Miss Alans came from Sir Harry Otway, she
      had borne it like a good girl. She might well &ldquo;screech&rdquo; when she heard
      that it came partly from her lover. Mr. Vyse was a tease&mdash;something
      worse than a tease: he took a malicious pleasure in thwarting people. The
      clergyman, knowing this, looked at Miss Honeychurch with more than his
      usual kindness.
    </p>
    <p>
      When she exclaimed, &ldquo;But Cecil&rsquo;s Emersons&mdash;they can&rsquo;t possibly be the
      same ones&mdash;there is that&mdash;&rdquo; he did not consider that the
      exclamation was strange, but saw in it an opportunity of diverting the
      conversation while she recovered her composure. He diverted it as follows:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Emersons who were at Florence, do you mean? No, I don&rsquo;t suppose it
      will prove to be them. It is probably a long cry from them to friends of
      Mr. Vyse&rsquo;s. Oh, Mrs. Honeychurch, the oddest people! The queerest people!
      For our part we liked them, didn&rsquo;t we?&rdquo; He appealed to Lucy. &ldquo;There was a
      great scene over some violets. They picked violets and filled all the
      vases in the room of these very Miss Alans who have failed to come to
      Cissie Villa. Poor little ladies! So shocked and so pleased. It used to be
      one of Miss Catharine&rsquo;s great stories. &lsquo;My dear sister loves flowers,&rsquo; it
      began. They found the whole room a mass of blue&mdash;vases and jugs&mdash;and
      the story ends with &lsquo;So ungentlemanly and yet so beautiful.&rsquo; It is all
      very difficult. Yes, I always connect those Florentine Emersons with
      violets.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Fiasco&rsquo;s done you this time,&rdquo; remarked Freddy, not seeing that his
      sister&rsquo;s face was very red. She could not recover herself. Mr. Beebe saw
      it, and continued to divert the conversation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;These particular Emersons consisted of a father and a son&mdash;the son a
      goodly, if not a good young man; not a fool, I fancy, but very immature&mdash;pessimism,
      et cetera. Our special joy was the father&mdash;such a sentimental
      darling, and people declared he had murdered his wife.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      In his normal state Mr. Beebe would never have repeated such gossip, but
      he was trying to shelter Lucy in her little trouble. He repeated any
      rubbish that came into his head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Murdered his wife?&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch. &ldquo;Lucy, don&rsquo;t desert us&mdash;go
      on playing bumble-puppy. Really, the Pension Bertolini must have been the
      oddest place. That&rsquo;s the second murderer I&rsquo;ve heard of as being there.
      Whatever was Charlotte doing to stop? By-the-by, we really must ask
      Charlotte here some time.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe could recall no second murderer. He suggested that his hostess
      was mistaken. At the hint of opposition she warmed. She was perfectly sure
      that there had been a second tourist of whom the same story had been told.
      The name escaped her. What was the name? Oh, what was the name? She
      clasped her knees for the name. Something in Thackeray. She struck her
      matronly forehead.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy asked her brother whether Cecil was in.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, don&rsquo;t go!&rdquo; he cried, and tried to catch her by the ankles.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I must go,&rdquo; she said gravely. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t be silly. You always overdo it when
      you play.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      As she left them her mother&rsquo;s shout of &ldquo;Harris!&rdquo; shivered the tranquil
      air, and reminded her that she had told a lie and had never put it right.
      Such a senseless lie, too, yet it shattered her nerves and made her
      connect these Emersons, friends of Cecil&rsquo;s, with a pair of nondescript
      tourists. Hitherto truth had come to her naturally. She saw that for the
      future she must be more vigilant, and be&mdash;absolutely truthful? Well,
      at all events, she must not tell lies. She hurried up the garden, still
      flushed with shame. A word from Cecil would soothe her, she was sure.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cecil!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hullo!&rdquo; he called, and leant out of the smoking-room window. He seemed in
      high spirits. &ldquo;I was hoping you&rsquo;d come. I heard you all bear-gardening,
      but there&rsquo;s better fun up here. I, even I, have won a great victory for
      the Comic Muse. George Meredith&rsquo;s right&mdash;the cause of Comedy and the
      cause of Truth are really the same; and I, even I, have found tenants for
      the distressful Cissie Villa. Don&rsquo;t be angry! Don&rsquo;t be angry! You&rsquo;ll
      forgive me when you hear it all.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He looked very attractive when his face was bright, and he dispelled her
      ridiculous forebodings at once.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have heard,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Freddy has told us. Naughty Cecil! I suppose I
      must forgive you. Just think of all the trouble I took for nothing!
      Certainly the Miss Alans are a little tiresome, and I&rsquo;d rather have nice
      friends of yours. But you oughtn&rsquo;t to tease one so.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Friends of mine?&rdquo; he laughed. &ldquo;But, Lucy, the whole joke is to come! Come
      here.&rdquo; But she remained standing where she was. &ldquo;Do you know where I met
      these desirable tenants? In the National Gallery, when I was up to see my
      mother last week.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What an odd place to meet people!&rdquo; she said nervously. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t quite
      understand.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In the Umbrian Room. Absolute strangers. They were admiring Luca
      Signorelli&mdash;of course, quite stupidly. However, we got talking, and
      they refreshed me not a little. They had been to Italy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But, Cecil&mdash;&rdquo; proceeded hilariously.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In the course of conversation they said that they wanted a country
      cottage&mdash;the father to live there, the son to run down for week-ends.
      I thought, &lsquo;What a chance of scoring off Sir Harry!&rsquo; and I took their
      address and a London reference, found they weren&rsquo;t actual blackguards&mdash;it
      was great sport&mdash;and wrote to him, making out&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cecil! No, it&rsquo;s not fair. I&rsquo;ve probably met them before&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He bore her down.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perfectly fair. Anything is fair that punishes a snob. That old man will
      do the neighbourhood a world of good. Sir Harry is too disgusting with his
      &lsquo;decayed gentlewomen.&rsquo; I meant to read him a lesson some time. No, Lucy,
      the classes ought to mix, and before long you&rsquo;ll agree with me. There
      ought to be intermarriage&mdash;all sorts of things. I believe in
      democracy&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, you don&rsquo;t,&rdquo; she snapped. &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t know what the word means.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He stared at her, and felt again that she had failed to be Leonardesque.
      &ldquo;No, you don&rsquo;t!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Her face was inartistic&mdash;that of a peevish virago.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It isn&rsquo;t fair, Cecil. I blame you&mdash;I blame you very much indeed. You
      had no business to undo my work about the Miss Alans, and make me look
      ridiculous. You call it scoring off Sir Harry, but do you realize that it
      is all at my expense? I consider it most disloyal of you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She left him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Temper!&rdquo; he thought, raising his eyebrows.
    </p>
    <p>
      No, it was worse than temper&mdash;snobbishness. As long as Lucy thought
      that his own smart friends were supplanting the Miss Alans, she had not
      minded. He perceived that these new tenants might be of value
      educationally. He would tolerate the father and draw out the son, who was
      silent. In the interests of the Comic Muse and of Truth, he would bring
      them to Windy Corner.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0011" id="link2HCH0011">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter XI: In Mrs. Vyse&rsquo;s Well-Appointed Flat
    </h2>
    <p>
      The Comic Muse, though able to look after her own interests, did not
      disdain the assistance of Mr. Vyse. His idea of bringing the Emersons to
      Windy Corner struck her as decidedly good, and she carried through the
      negotiations without a hitch. Sir Harry Otway signed the agreement, met
      Mr. Emerson, who was duly disillusioned. The Miss Alans were duly
      offended, and wrote a dignified letter to Lucy, whom they held responsible
      for the failure. Mr. Beebe planned pleasant moments for the new-comers,
      and told Mrs. Honeychurch that Freddy must call on them as soon as they
      arrived. Indeed, so ample was the Muse&rsquo;s equipment that she permitted Mr.
      Harris, never a very robust criminal, to droop his head, to be forgotten,
      and to die.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy&mdash;to descend from bright heaven to earth, whereon there are
      shadows because there are hills&mdash;Lucy was at first plunged into
      despair, but settled after a little thought that it did not matter the
      very least. Now that she was engaged, the Emersons would scarcely insult
      her and were welcome into the neighbourhood. And Cecil was welcome to
      bring whom he would into the neighbourhood. Therefore Cecil was welcome to
      bring the Emersons into the neighbourhood. But, as I say, this took a
      little thinking, and&mdash;so illogical are girls&mdash;the event remained
      rather greater and rather more dreadful than it should have done. She was
      glad that a visit to Mrs. Vyse now fell due; the tenants moved into Cissie
      Villa while she was safe in the London flat.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cecil&mdash;Cecil darling,&rdquo; she whispered the evening she arrived, and
      crept into his arms.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil, too, became demonstrative. He saw that the needful fire had been
      kindled in Lucy. At last she longed for attention, as a woman should, and
      looked up to him because he was a man.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So you do love me, little thing?&rdquo; he murmured.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Cecil, I do, I do! I don&rsquo;t know what I should do without you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Several days passed. Then she had a letter from Miss Bartlett. A coolness
      had sprung up between the two cousins, and they had not corresponded since
      they parted in August. The coolness dated from what Charlotte would call
      &ldquo;the flight to Rome,&rdquo; and in Rome it had increased amazingly. For the
      companion who is merely uncongenial in the mediaeval world becomes
      exasperating in the classical. Charlotte, unselfish in the Forum, would
      have tried a sweeter temper than Lucy&rsquo;s, and once, in the Baths of
      Caracalla, they had doubted whether they could continue their tour. Lucy
      had said she would join the Vyses&mdash;Mrs. Vyse was an acquaintance of
      her mother, so there was no impropriety in the plan and Miss Bartlett had
      replied that she was quite used to being abandoned suddenly. Finally
      nothing happened; but the coolness remained, and, for Lucy, was even
      increased when she opened the letter and read as follows. It had been
      forwarded from Windy Corner.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Tunbridge Wells,
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;September.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dearest Lucia,
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have news of you at last! Miss Lavish has been bicycling in your parts,
      but was not sure whether a call would be welcome. Puncturing her tire near
      Summer Street, and it being mended while she sat very woebegone in that
      pretty churchyard, she saw to her astonishment, a door open opposite and
      the younger Emerson man come out. He said his father had just taken the
      house. He SAID he did not know that you lived in the neighbourhood (?). He
      never suggested giving Eleanor a cup of tea. Dear Lucy, I am much worried,
      and I advise you to make a clean breast of his past behaviour to your
      mother, Freddy, and Mr. Vyse, who will forbid him to enter the house, etc.
      That was a great misfortune, and I dare say you have told them already.
      Mr. Vyse is so sensitive. I remember how I used to get on his nerves at
      Rome. I am very sorry about it all, and should not feel easy unless I
      warned you.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Believe me,
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your anxious and loving cousin,
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Charlotte.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy was much annoyed, and replied as follows:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Beauchamp Mansions, S.W.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dear Charlotte,
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Many thanks for your warning. When Mr. Emerson forgot himself on the
      mountain, you made me promise not to tell mother, because you said she
      would blame you for not being always with me. I have kept that promise,
      and cannot possibly tell her now. I have said both to her and Cecil that I
      met the Emersons at Florence, and that they are respectable people&mdash;which
      I do think&mdash;and the reason that he offered Miss Lavish no tea was
      probably that he had none himself. She should have tried at the Rectory. I
      cannot begin making a fuss at this stage. You must see that it would be
      too absurd. If the Emersons heard I had complained of them, they would
      think themselves of importance, which is exactly what they are not. I like
      the old father, and look forward to seeing him again. As for the son, I am
      sorry for him when we meet, rather than for myself. They are known to
      Cecil, who is very well and spoke of you the other day. We expect to be
      married in January.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Lavish cannot have told you much about me, for I am not at Windy
      Corner at all, but here. Please do not put &lsquo;Private&rsquo; outside your envelope
      again. No one opens my letters.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yours affectionately,
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;L. M. Honeychurch.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Secrecy has this disadvantage: we lose the sense of proportion; we cannot
      tell whether our secret is important or not. Were Lucy and her cousin
      closeted with a great thing which would destroy Cecil&rsquo;s life if he
      discovered it, or with a little thing which he would laugh at? Miss
      Bartlett suggested the former. Perhaps she was right. It had become a
      great thing now. Left to herself, Lucy would have told her mother and her
      lover ingenuously, and it would have remained a little thing. &ldquo;Emerson,
      not Harris&rdquo;; it was only that a few weeks ago. She tried to tell Cecil
      even now when they were laughing about some beautiful lady who had smitten
      his heart at school. But her body behaved so ridiculously that she
      stopped.
    </p>
    <p>
      She and her secret stayed ten days longer in the deserted Metropolis
      visiting the scenes they were to know so well later on. It did her no
      harm, Cecil thought, to learn the framework of society, while society
      itself was absent on the golf-links or the moors. The weather was cool,
      and it did her no harm. In spite of the season, Mrs. Vyse managed to
      scrape together a dinner-party consisting entirely of the grandchildren of
      famous people. The food was poor, but the talk had a witty weariness that
      impressed the girl. One was tired of everything, it seemed. One launched
      into enthusiasms only to collapse gracefully, and pick oneself up amid
      sympathetic laughter. In this atmosphere the Pension Bertolini and Windy
      Corner appeared equally crude, and Lucy saw that her London career would
      estrange her a little from all that she had loved in the past.
    </p>
    <p>
      The grandchildren asked her to play the piano.
    </p>
    <p>
      She played Schumann. &ldquo;Now some Beethoven&rdquo; called Cecil, when the querulous
      beauty of the music had died. She shook her head and played Schumann
      again. The melody rose, unprofitably magical. It broke; it was resumed
      broken, not marching once from the cradle to the grave. The sadness of the
      incomplete&mdash;the sadness that is often Life, but should never be Art&mdash;throbbed
      in its disjected phrases, and made the nerves of the audience throb. Not
      thus had she played on the little draped piano at the Bertolini, and &ldquo;Too
      much Schumann&rdquo; was not the remark that Mr. Beebe had passed to himself
      when she returned.
    </p>
    <p>
      When the guests were gone, and Lucy had gone to bed, Mrs. Vyse paced up
      and down the drawing-room, discussing her little party with her son. Mrs.
      Vyse was a nice woman, but her personality, like many another&rsquo;s, had been
      swamped by London, for it needs a strong head to live among many people.
      The too vast orb of her fate had crushed her; and she had seen too many
      seasons, too many cities, too many men, for her abilities, and even with
      Cecil she was mechanical, and behaved as if he was not one son, but, so to
      speak, a filial crowd.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Make Lucy one of us,&rdquo; she said, looking round intelligently at the end of
      each sentence, and straining her lips apart until she spoke again. &ldquo;Lucy
      is becoming wonderful&mdash;wonderful.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Her music always was wonderful.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, but she is purging off the Honeychurch taint, most excellent
      Honeychurches, but you know what I mean. She is not always quoting
      servants, or asking one how the pudding is made.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Italy has done it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps,&rdquo; she murmured, thinking of the museum that represented Italy to
      her. &ldquo;It is just possible. Cecil, mind you marry her next January. She is
      one of us already.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But her music!&rdquo; he exclaimed. &ldquo;The style of her! How she kept to Schumann
      when, like an idiot, I wanted Beethoven. Schumann was right for this
      evening. Schumann was the thing. Do you know, mother, I shall have our
      children educated just like Lucy. Bring them up among honest country folks
      for freshness, send them to Italy for subtlety, and then&mdash;not till
      then&mdash;let them come to London. I don&rsquo;t believe in these London
      educations&mdash;&rdquo; He broke off, remembering that he had had one himself,
      and concluded, &ldquo;At all events, not for women.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Make her one of us,&rdquo; repeated Mrs. Vyse, and processed to bed.
    </p>
    <p>
      As she was dozing off, a cry&mdash;the cry of nightmare&mdash;rang from
      Lucy&rsquo;s room. Lucy could ring for the maid if she liked but Mrs. Vyse
      thought it kind to go herself. She found the girl sitting upright with her
      hand on her cheek.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am so sorry, Mrs. Vyse&mdash;it is these dreams.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Bad dreams?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Just dreams.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The elder lady smiled and kissed her, saying very distinctly: &ldquo;You should
      have heard us talking about you, dear. He admires you more than ever.
      Dream of that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy returned the kiss, still covering one cheek with her hand. Mrs. Vyse
      recessed to bed. Cecil, whom the cry had not awoke, snored. Darkness
      enveloped the flat.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0012" id="link2HCH0012">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter XII: Twelfth Chapter
    </h2>
    <p>
      It was a Saturday afternoon, gay and brilliant after abundant rains, and
      the spirit of youth dwelt in it, though the season was now autumn. All
      that was gracious triumphed. As the motorcars passed through Summer Street
      they raised only a little dust, and their stench was soon dispersed by the
      wind and replaced by the scent of the wet birches or of the pines. Mr.
      Beebe, at leisure for life&rsquo;s amenities, leant over his Rectory gate.
      Freddy leant by him, smoking a pendant pipe.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Suppose we go and hinder those new people opposite for a little.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;M&rsquo;m.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They might amuse you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Freddy, whom his fellow-creatures never amused, suggested that the new
      people might be feeling a bit busy, and so on, since they had only just
      moved in.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suggested we should hinder them,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe. &ldquo;They are worth it.&rdquo;
       Unlatching the gate, he sauntered over the triangular green to Cissie
      Villa. &ldquo;Hullo!&rdquo; he cried, shouting in at the open door, through which much
      squalor was visible.
    </p>
    <p>
      A grave voice replied, &ldquo;Hullo!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve brought someone to see you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll be down in a minute.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The passage was blocked by a wardrobe, which the removal men had failed to
      carry up the stairs. Mr. Beebe edged round it with difficulty. The
      sitting-room itself was blocked with books.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Are these people great readers?&rdquo; Freddy whispered. &ldquo;Are they that sort?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I fancy they know how to read&mdash;a rare accomplishment. What have they
      got? Byron. Exactly. A Shropshire Lad. Never heard of it. The Way of All
      Flesh. Never heard of it. Gibbon. Hullo! dear George reads German. Um&mdash;um&mdash;Schopenhauer,
      Nietzsche, and so we go on. Well, I suppose your generation knows its own
      business, Honeychurch.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Beebe, look at that,&rdquo; said Freddy in awestruck tones.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the cornice of the wardrobe, the hand of an amateur had painted this
      inscription: &ldquo;Mistrust all enterprises that require new clothes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know. Isn&rsquo;t it jolly? I like that. I&rsquo;m certain that&rsquo;s the old man&rsquo;s
      doing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How very odd of him!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Surely you agree?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But Freddy was his mother&rsquo;s son and felt that one ought not to go on
      spoiling the furniture.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Pictures!&rdquo; the clergyman continued, scrambling about the room. &ldquo;Giotto&mdash;they
      got that at Florence, I&rsquo;ll be bound.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The same as Lucy&rsquo;s got.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, by-the-by, did Miss Honeychurch enjoy London?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She came back yesterday.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suppose she had a good time?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, very,&rdquo; said Freddy, taking up a book. &ldquo;She and Cecil are thicker
      than ever.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s good hearing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I wish I wasn&rsquo;t such a fool, Mr. Beebe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe ignored the remark.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy used to be nearly as stupid as I am, but it&rsquo;ll be very different
      now, mother thinks. She will read all kinds of books.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So will you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Only medical books. Not books that you can talk about afterwards. Cecil
      is teaching Lucy Italian, and he says her playing is wonderful. There are
      all kinds of things in it that we have never noticed. Cecil says&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What on earth are those people doing upstairs? Emerson&mdash;we think
      we&rsquo;ll come another time.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      George ran down-stairs and pushed them into the room without speaking.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let me introduce Mr. Honeychurch, a neighbour.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Then Freddy hurled one of the thunderbolts of youth. Perhaps he was shy,
      perhaps he was friendly, or perhaps he thought that George&rsquo;s face wanted
      washing. At all events he greeted him with, &ldquo;How d&rsquo;ye do? Come and have a
      bathe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, all right,&rdquo; said George, impassive.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe was highly entertained.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;How d&rsquo;ye do? how d&rsquo;ye do? Come and have a bathe,&rsquo;&rdquo; he chuckled. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s
      the best conversational opening I&rsquo;ve ever heard. But I&rsquo;m afraid it will
      only act between men. Can you picture a lady who has been introduced to
      another lady by a third lady opening civilities with &lsquo;How do you do? Come
      and have a bathe&rsquo;? And yet you will tell me that the sexes are equal.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I tell you that they shall be,&rdquo; said Mr. Emerson, who had been slowly
      descending the stairs. &ldquo;Good afternoon, Mr. Beebe. I tell you they shall
      be comrades, and George thinks the same.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We are to raise ladies to our level?&rdquo; the clergyman inquired.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Garden of Eden,&rdquo; pursued Mr. Emerson, still descending, &ldquo;which you
      place in the past, is really yet to come. We shall enter it when we no
      longer despise our bodies.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe disclaimed placing the Garden of Eden anywhere.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In this&mdash;not in other things&mdash;we men are ahead. We despise the
      body less than women do. But not until we are comrades shall we enter the
      garden.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I say, what about this bathe?&rdquo; murmured Freddy, appalled at the mass of
      philosophy that was approaching him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I believed in a return to Nature once. But how can we return to Nature
      when we have never been with her? To-day, I believe that we must discover
      Nature. After many conquests we shall attain simplicity. It is our
      heritage.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let me introduce Mr. Honeychurch, whose sister you will remember at
      Florence.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you do? Very glad to see you, and that you are taking George for a
      bathe. Very glad to hear that your sister is going to marry. Marriage is a
      duty. I am sure that she will be happy, for we know Mr. Vyse, too. He has
      been most kind. He met us by chance in the National Gallery, and arranged
      everything about this delightful house. Though I hope I have not vexed Sir
      Harry Otway. I have met so few Liberal landowners, and I was anxious to
      compare his attitude towards the game laws with the Conservative attitude.
      Ah, this wind! You do well to bathe. Yours is a glorious country,
      Honeychurch!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not a bit!&rdquo; mumbled Freddy. &ldquo;I must&mdash;that is to say, I have to&mdash;have
      the pleasure of calling on you later on, my mother says, I hope.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;CALL, my lad? Who taught us that drawing-room twaddle? Call on your
      grandmother! Listen to the wind among the pines! Yours is a glorious
      country.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe came to the rescue.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Emerson, he will call, I shall call; you or your son will return our
      calls before ten days have elapsed. I trust that you have realized about
      the ten days&rsquo; interval. It does not count that I helped you with the
      stair-eyes yesterday. It does not count that they are going to bathe this
      afternoon.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, go and bathe, George. Why do you dawdle talking? Bring them back to
      tea. Bring back some milk, cakes, honey. The change will do you good.
      George has been working very hard at his office. I can&rsquo;t believe he&rsquo;s
      well.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      George bowed his head, dusty and sombre, exhaling the peculiar smell of
      one who has handled furniture.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you really want this bathe?&rdquo; Freddy asked him. &ldquo;It is only a pond,
      don&rsquo;t you know. I dare say you are used to something better.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes&mdash;I have said &lsquo;Yes&rsquo; already.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe felt bound to assist his young friend, and led the way out of
      the house and into the pine-woods. How glorious it was! For a little time
      the voice of old Mr. Emerson pursued them dispensing good wishes and
      philosophy. It ceased, and they only heard the fair wind blowing the
      bracken and the trees. Mr. Beebe, who could be silent, but who could not
      bear silence, was compelled to chatter, since the expedition looked like a
      failure, and neither of his companions would utter a word. He spoke of
      Florence. George attended gravely, assenting or dissenting with slight but
      determined gestures that were as inexplicable as the motions of the
      tree-tops above their heads.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And what a coincidence that you should meet Mr. Vyse! Did you realize
      that you would find all the Pension Bertolini down here?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I did not. Miss Lavish told me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When I was a young man, I always meant to write a &lsquo;History of
      Coincidence.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      No enthusiasm.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Though, as a matter of fact, coincidences are much rarer than we suppose.
      For example, it isn&rsquo;t purely coincidentally that you are here now, when
      one comes to reflect.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      To his relief, George began to talk.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is. I have reflected. It is Fate. Everything is Fate. We are flung
      together by Fate, drawn apart by Fate&mdash;flung together, drawn apart.
      The twelve winds blow us&mdash;we settle nothing&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have not reflected at all,&rdquo; rapped the clergyman. &ldquo;Let me give you a
      useful tip, Emerson: attribute nothing to Fate. Don&rsquo;t say, &lsquo;I didn&rsquo;t do
      this,&rsquo; for you did it, ten to one. Now I&rsquo;ll cross-question you. Where did
      you first meet Miss Honeychurch and myself?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Italy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And where did you meet Mr. Vyse, who is going to marry Miss Honeychurch?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;National Gallery.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Looking at Italian art. There you are, and yet you talk of coincidence
      and Fate. You naturally seek out things Italian, and so do we and our
      friends. This narrows the field immeasurably we meet again in it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is Fate that I am here,&rdquo; persisted George. &ldquo;But you can call it Italy
      if it makes you less unhappy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe slid away from such heavy treatment of the subject. But he was
      infinitely tolerant of the young, and had no desire to snub George.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And so for this and for other reasons my &lsquo;History of Coincidence&rsquo; is
      still to write.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      Wishing to round off the episode, he added; &ldquo;We are all so glad that you
      have come.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Here we are!&rdquo; called Freddy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, good!&rdquo; exclaimed Mr. Beebe, mopping his brow.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In there&rsquo;s the pond. I wish it was bigger,&rdquo; he added apologetically.
    </p>
    <p>
      They climbed down a slippery bank of pine-needles. There lay the pond, set
      in its little alp of green&mdash;only a pond, but large enough to contain
      the human body, and pure enough to reflect the sky. On account of the
      rains, the waters had flooded the surrounding grass, which showed like a
      beautiful emerald path, tempting these feet towards the central pool.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s distinctly successful, as ponds go,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe. &ldquo;No apologies
      are necessary for the pond.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      George sat down where the ground was dry, and drearily unlaced his boots.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Aren&rsquo;t those masses of willow-herb splendid? I love willow-herb in seed.
      What&rsquo;s the name of this aromatic plant?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      No one knew, or seemed to care.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;These abrupt changes of vegetation&mdash;this little spongeous tract of
      water plants, and on either side of it all the growths are tough or
      brittle&mdash;heather, bracken, hurts, pines. Very charming, very
      charming.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Beebe, aren&rsquo;t you bathing?&rdquo; called Freddy, as he stripped himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe thought he was not.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Water&rsquo;s wonderful!&rdquo; cried Freddy, prancing in.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Water&rsquo;s water,&rdquo; murmured George. Wetting his hair first&mdash;a sure sign
      of apathy&mdash;he followed Freddy into the divine, as indifferent as if
      he were a statue and the pond a pail of soapsuds. It was necessary to use
      his muscles. It was necessary to keep clean. Mr. Beebe watched them, and
      watched the seeds of the willow-herb dance chorically above their heads.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Apooshoo, apooshoo, apooshoo,&rdquo; went Freddy, swimming for two strokes in
      either direction, and then becoming involved in reeds or mud.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is it worth it?&rdquo; asked the other, Michelangelesque on the flooded margin.
    </p>
    <p>
      The bank broke away, and he fell into the pool before he had weighed the
      question properly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hee-poof&mdash;I&rsquo;ve swallowed a pollywog, Mr. Beebe, water&rsquo;s wonderful,
      water&rsquo;s simply ripping.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Water&rsquo;s not so bad,&rdquo; said George, reappearing from his plunge, and
      sputtering at the sun.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Water&rsquo;s wonderful. Mr. Beebe, do.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Apooshoo, kouf.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe, who was hot, and who always acquiesced where possible, looked
      around him. He could detect no parishioners except the pine-trees, rising
      up steeply on all sides, and gesturing to each other against the blue. How
      glorious it was! The world of motor-cars and rural Deans receded
      inimitably. Water, sky, evergreens, a wind&mdash;these things not even the
      seasons can touch, and surely they lie beyond the intrusion of man?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I may as well wash too&rdquo;; and soon his garments made a third little pile
      on the sward, and he too asserted the wonder of the water.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was ordinary water, nor was there very much of it, and, as Freddy said,
      it reminded one of swimming in a salad. The three gentlemen rotated in the
      pool breast high, after the fashion of the nymphs in Gotterdammerung. But
      either because the rains had given a freshness or because the sun was
      shedding a most glorious heat, or because two of the gentlemen were young
      in years and the third young in spirit&mdash;for some reason or other a
      change came over them, and they forgot Italy and Botany and Fate. They
      began to play. Mr. Beebe and Freddy splashed each other. A little
      deferentially, they splashed George. He was quiet: they feared they had
      offended him. Then all the forces of youth burst out. He smiled, flung
      himself at them, splashed them, ducked them, kicked them, muddied them,
      and drove them out of the pool.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Race you round it, then,&rdquo; cried Freddy, and they raced in the sunshine,
      and George took a short cut and dirtied his shins, and had to bathe a
      second time. Then Mr. Beebe consented to run&mdash;a memorable sight.
    </p>
    <p>
      They ran to get dry, they bathed to get cool, they played at being Indians
      in the willow-herbs and in the bracken, they bathed to get clean. And all
      the time three little bundles lay discreetly on the sward, proclaiming:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No. We are what matters. Without us shall no enterprise begin. To us
      shall all flesh turn in the end.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A try! A try!&rdquo; yelled Freddy, snatching up George&rsquo;s bundle and placing it
      beside an imaginary goal-post.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Socker rules,&rdquo; George retorted, scattering Freddy&rsquo;s bundle with a kick.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Goal!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Goal!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Pass!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Take care my watch!&rdquo; cried Mr. Beebe.
    </p>
    <p>
      Clothes flew in all directions.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Take care my hat! No, that&rsquo;s enough, Freddy. Dress now. No, I say!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But the two young men were delirious. Away they twinkled into the trees,
      Freddy with a clerical waistcoat under his arm, George with a wide-awake
      hat on his dripping hair.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;ll do!&rdquo; shouted Mr. Beebe, remembering that after all he was in his
      own parish. Then his voice changed as if every pine-tree was a Rural Dean.
      &ldquo;Hi! Steady on! I see people coming you fellows!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Yells, and widening circles over the dappled earth.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hi! hi! LADIES!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Neither George nor Freddy was truly refined. Still, they did not hear Mr.
      Beebe&rsquo;s last warning or they would have avoided Mrs. Honeychurch, Cecil,
      and Lucy, who were walking down to call on old Mrs. Butterworth. Freddy
      dropped the waistcoat at their feet, and dashed into some bracken. George
      whooped in their faces, turned and scudded away down the path to the pond,
      still clad in Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s hat.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Gracious alive!&rdquo; cried Mrs. Honeychurch. &ldquo;Whoever were those unfortunate
      people? Oh, dears, look away! And poor Mr. Beebe, too! Whatever has
      happened?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come this way immediately,&rdquo; commanded Cecil, who always felt that he must
      lead women, though he knew not whither, and protect them, though he knew not
      against what. He led them now towards the bracken where Freddy sat
      concealed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, poor Mr. Beebe! Was that his waistcoat we left in the path? Cecil,
      Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s waistcoat&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      No business of ours, said Cecil, glancing at Lucy, who was all parasol and
      evidently &ldquo;minded.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I fancy Mr. Beebe jumped back into the pond.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This way, please, Mrs. Honeychurch, this way.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They followed him up the bank attempting the tense yet nonchalant
      expression that is suitable for ladies on such occasions.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I can&rsquo;t help it,&rdquo; said a voice close ahead, and Freddy reared a
      freckled face and a pair of snowy shoulders out of the fronds. &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t be
      trodden on, can I?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good gracious me, dear; so it&rsquo;s you! What miserable management! Why not
      have a comfortable bath at home, with hot and cold laid on?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Look here, mother, a fellow must wash, and a fellow&rsquo;s got to dry, and if
      another fellow&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dear, no doubt you&rsquo;re right as usual, but you are in no position to
      argue. Come, Lucy.&rdquo; They turned. &ldquo;Oh, look&mdash;don&rsquo;t look! Oh, poor Mr.
      Beebe! How unfortunate again&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      For Mr. Beebe was just crawling out of the pond, on whose surface garments
      of an intimate nature did float; while George, the world-weary George,
      shouted to Freddy that he had hooked a fish.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And me, I&rsquo;ve swallowed one,&rdquo; answered he of the bracken. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve swallowed
      a pollywog. It wriggleth in my tummy. I shall die&mdash;Emerson you beast,
      you&rsquo;ve got on my bags.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hush, dears,&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch, who found it impossible to remain
      shocked. &ldquo;And do be sure you dry yourselves thoroughly first. All these
      colds come of not drying thoroughly.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mother, do come away,&rdquo; said Lucy. &ldquo;Oh for goodness&rsquo; sake, do come.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hullo!&rdquo; cried George, so that again the ladies stopped.
    </p>
    <p>
      He regarded himself as dressed. Barefoot, bare-chested, radiant and
      personable against the shadowy woods, he called:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hullo, Miss Honeychurch! Hullo!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Bow, Lucy; better bow. Whoever is it? I shall bow.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Honeychurch bowed.
    </p>
    <p>
      That evening and all that night the water ran away. On the morrow the pool
      had shrunk to its old size and lost its glory. It had been a call to the
      blood and to the relaxed will, a passing benediction whose influence did
      not pass, a holiness, a spell, a momentary chalice for youth.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0013" id="link2HCH0013">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter XIII: How Miss Bartlett&rsquo;s Boiler Was So Tiresome
    </h2>
    <p>
      How often had Lucy rehearsed this bow, this interview! But she had always
      rehearsed them indoors, and with certain accessories, which surely we have
      a right to assume. Who could foretell that she and George would meet in
      the rout of a civilization, amidst an army of coats and collars and boots
      that lay wounded over the sunlit earth? She had imagined a young Mr.
      Emerson, who might be shy or morbid or indifferent or furtively impudent.
      She was prepared for all of these. But she had never imagined one who
      would be happy and greet her with the shout of the morning star.
    </p>
    <p>
      Indoors herself, partaking of tea with old Mrs. Butterworth, she reflected
      that it is impossible to foretell the future with any degree of accuracy,
      that it is impossible to rehearse life. A fault in the scenery, a face in
      the audience, an irruption of the audience on to the stage, and all our
      carefully planned gestures mean nothing, or mean too much. &ldquo;I will bow,&rdquo;
       she had thought. &ldquo;I will not shake hands with him. That will be just the
      proper thing.&rdquo; She had bowed&mdash;but to whom? To gods, to heroes, to the
      nonsense of school-girls! She had bowed across the rubbish that cumbers
      the world.
    </p>
    <p>
      So ran her thoughts, while her faculties were busy with Cecil. It was
      another of those dreadful engagement calls. Mrs. Butterworth had wanted to
      see him, and he did not want to be seen. He did not want to hear about
      hydrangeas, why they change their colour at the seaside. He did not want
      to join the C. O. S. When cross he was always elaborate, and made long,
      clever answers where &ldquo;Yes&rdquo; or &ldquo;No&rdquo; would have done. Lucy soothed him and
      tinkered at the conversation in a way that promised well for their married
      peace. No one is perfect, and surely it is wiser to discover the
      imperfections before wedlock. Miss Bartlett, indeed, though not in word,
      had taught the girl that this our life contains nothing satisfactory.
      Lucy, though she disliked the teacher, regarded the teaching as profound,
      and applied it to her lover.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy,&rdquo; said her mother, when they got home, &ldquo;is anything the matter with
      Cecil?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The question was ominous; up till now Mrs. Honeychurch had behaved with
      charity and restraint.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I don&rsquo;t think so, mother; Cecil&rsquo;s all right.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps he&rsquo;s tired.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy compromised: perhaps Cecil was a little tired.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because otherwise&rdquo;&mdash;she pulled out her bonnet-pins with gathering
      displeasure&mdash;&ldquo;because otherwise I cannot account for him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I do think Mrs. Butterworth is rather tiresome, if you mean that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cecil has told you to think so. You were devoted to her as a little girl,
      and nothing will describe her goodness to you through the typhoid fever.
      No&mdash;it is just the same thing everywhere.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let me just put your bonnet away, may I?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Surely he could answer her civilly for one half-hour?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cecil has a very high standard for people,&rdquo; faltered Lucy, seeing trouble
      ahead. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s part of his ideals&mdash;it is really that that makes him
      sometimes seem&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, rubbish! If high ideals make a young man rude, the sooner he gets rid
      of them the better,&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch, handing her the bonnet.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now, mother! I&rsquo;ve seen you cross with Mrs. Butterworth yourself!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not in that way. At times I could wring her neck. But not in that way.
      No. It is the same with Cecil all over.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;By-the-by&mdash;I never told you. I had a letter from Charlotte while I
      was away in London.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      This attempt to divert the conversation was too puerile, and Mrs.
      Honeychurch resented it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Since Cecil came back from London, nothing appears to please him.
      Whenever I speak he winces;&mdash;I see him, Lucy; it is useless to
      contradict me. No doubt I am neither artistic nor literary nor
      intellectual nor musical, but I cannot help the drawing-room furniture;
      your father bought it and we must put up with it, will Cecil kindly
      remember.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&mdash;I see what you mean, and certainly Cecil oughtn&rsquo;t to. But he does
      not mean to be uncivil&mdash;he once explained&mdash;it is the things that
      upset him&mdash;he is easily upset by ugly things&mdash;he is not uncivil
      to PEOPLE.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is it a thing or a person when Freddy sings?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You can&rsquo;t expect a really musical person to enjoy comic songs as we do.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then why didn&rsquo;t he leave the room? Why sit wriggling and sneering and
      spoiling everyone&rsquo;s pleasure?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We mustn&rsquo;t be unjust to people,&rdquo; faltered Lucy. Something had enfeebled
      her, and the case for Cecil, which she had mastered so perfectly in
      London, would not come forth in an effective form. The two civilizations
      had clashed&mdash;Cecil hinted that they might&mdash;and she was dazzled
      and bewildered, as though the radiance that lies behind all civilization
      had blinded her eyes. Good taste and bad taste were only catchwords,
      garments of diverse cut; and music itself dissolved to a whisper through
      pine-trees, where the song is not distinguishable from the comic song.
    </p>
    <p>
      She remained in much embarrassment, while Mrs. Honeychurch changed her
      frock for dinner; and every now and then she said a word, and made things
      no better. There was no concealing the fact, Cecil had meant to be
      supercilious, and he had succeeded. And Lucy&mdash;she knew not why&mdash;wished
      that the trouble could have come at any other time.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Go and dress, dear; you&rsquo;ll be late.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right, mother&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t say &lsquo;All right&rsquo; and stop. Go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She obeyed, but loitered disconsolately at the landing window. It faced
      north, so there was little view, and no view of the sky. Now, as in the
      winter, the pine-trees hung close to her eyes. One connected the landing
      window with depression. No definite problem menaced her, but she sighed to
      herself, &ldquo;Oh, dear, what shall I do, what shall I do?&rdquo; It seemed to her
      that everyone else was behaving very badly. And she ought not to have
      mentioned Miss Bartlett&rsquo;s letter. She must be more careful; her mother was
      rather inquisitive, and might have asked what it was about. Oh, dear,
      what should she do?&mdash;and then Freddy came bounding upstairs, and joined
      the ranks of the ill-behaved.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I say, those are topping people.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear baby, how tiresome you&rsquo;ve been! You have no business to take them
      bathing in the Sacred Lake; it&rsquo;s much too public. It was all right for you but
      most awkward for everyone else. Do be more careful. You forget the place
      is growing half suburban.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I say, is anything on to-morrow week?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not that I know of.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then I want to ask the Emersons up to Sunday tennis.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, I wouldn&rsquo;t do that, Freddy, I wouldn&rsquo;t do that with all this muddle.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&rsquo;s wrong with the court? They won&rsquo;t mind a bump or two, and I&rsquo;ve
      ordered new balls.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I meant it&rsquo;s better not. I really mean it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He seized her by the elbows and humorously danced her up and down the
      passage. She pretended not to mind, but she could have screamed with
      temper. Cecil glanced at them as he proceeded to his toilet and they
      impeded Mary with her brood of hot-water cans. Then Mrs. Honeychurch
      opened her door and said: &ldquo;Lucy, what a noise you&rsquo;re making! I have
      something to say to you. Did you say you had had a letter from Charlotte?&rdquo;
       and Freddy ran away.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes. I really can&rsquo;t stop. I must dress too.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How&rsquo;s Charlotte?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The unfortunate girl returned.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;ve a bad habit of hurrying away in the middle of one&rsquo;s sentences. Did
      Charlotte mention her boiler?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Her WHAT?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you remember that her boiler was to be had out in October, and her
      bath cistern cleaned out, and all kinds of terrible to-doings?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t remember all Charlotte&rsquo;s worries,&rdquo; said Lucy bitterly. &ldquo;I shall
      have enough of my own, now that you are not pleased with Cecil.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Honeychurch might have flamed out. She did not. She said: &ldquo;Come here,
      old lady&mdash;thank you for putting away my bonnet&mdash;kiss me.&rdquo; And,
      though nothing is perfect, Lucy felt for the moment that her mother and
      Windy Corner and the Weald in the declining sun were perfect.
    </p>
    <p>
      So the grittiness went out of life. It generally did at Windy Corner. At
      the last minute, when the social machine was clogged hopelessly, one
      member or other of the family poured in a drop of oil. Cecil despised
      their methods&mdash;perhaps rightly. At all events, they were not his own.
    </p>
    <p>
      Dinner was at half-past seven. Freddy gabbled the grace, and they drew up
      their heavy chairs and fell to. Fortunately, the men were hungry. Nothing
      untoward occurred until the pudding. Then Freddy said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy, what&rsquo;s Emerson like?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I saw him in Florence,&rdquo; said Lucy, hoping that this would pass for a
      reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is he the clever sort, or is he a decent chap?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ask Cecil; it is Cecil who brought him here.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He is the clever sort, like myself,&rdquo; said Cecil.
    </p>
    <p>
      Freddy looked at him doubtfully.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How well did you know them at the Bertolini?&rdquo; asked Mrs. Honeychurch.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, very slightly. I mean, Charlotte knew them even less than I did.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, that reminds me&mdash;you never told me what Charlotte said in her
      letter.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;One thing and another,&rdquo; said Lucy, wondering whether she would get
      through the meal without a lie. &ldquo;Among other things, that an awful friend
      of hers had been bicycling through Summer Street, wondered if she&rsquo;d come
      up and see us, and mercifully didn&rsquo;t.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy, I do call the way you talk unkind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She was a novelist,&rdquo; said Lucy craftily. The remark was a happy one, for
      nothing roused Mrs. Honeychurch so much as literature in the hands of
      females. She would abandon every topic to inveigh against those women who
      (instead of minding their houses and their children) seek notoriety by
      print. Her attitude was: &ldquo;If books must be written, let them be written by
      men&rdquo;; and she developed it at great length, while Cecil yawned and Freddy
      played at &ldquo;This year, next year, now, never,&rdquo; with his plum-stones, and
      Lucy artfully fed the flames of her mother&rsquo;s wrath. But soon the
      conflagration died down, and the ghosts began to gather in the darkness.
      There were too many ghosts about. The original ghost&mdash;that touch of
      lips on her cheek&mdash;had surely been laid long ago; it could be nothing
      to her that a man had kissed her on a mountain once. But it had begotten a
      spectral family&mdash;Mr. Harris, Miss Bartlett&rsquo;s letter, Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s
      memories of violets&mdash;and one or other of these was bound to haunt her
      before Cecil&rsquo;s very eyes. It was Miss Bartlett who returned now, and with
      appalling vividness.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have been thinking, Lucy, of that letter of Charlotte&rsquo;s. How is she?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I tore the thing up.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Didn&rsquo;t she say how she was? How does she sound? Cheerful?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, yes I suppose so&mdash;no&mdash;not very cheerful, I suppose.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then, depend upon it, it IS the boiler. I know myself how water preys
      upon one&rsquo;s mind. I would rather anything else&mdash;even a misfortune with
      the meat.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil laid his hand over his eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So would I,&rdquo; asserted Freddy, backing his mother up&mdash;backing up the
      spirit of her remark rather than the substance.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And I have been thinking,&rdquo; she added rather nervously, &ldquo;surely we could
      squeeze Charlotte in here next week, and give her a nice holiday while
      the plumbers at Tunbridge Wells finish. I have not seen poor Charlotte for so
      long.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It was more than her nerves could stand. And she could not protest
      violently after her mother&rsquo;s goodness to her upstairs.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mother, no!&rdquo; she pleaded. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s impossible. We can&rsquo;t have Charlotte on
      the top of the other things; we&rsquo;re squeezed to death as it is. Freddy&rsquo;s
      got a friend coming Tuesday, there&rsquo;s Cecil, and you&rsquo;ve promised to take in
      Minnie Beebe because of the diphtheria scare. It simply can&rsquo;t be done.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nonsense! It can.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If Minnie sleeps in the bath. Not otherwise.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Minnie can sleep with you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I won&rsquo;t have her.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then, if you&rsquo;re so selfish, Mr. Floyd must share a room with Freddy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Bartlett, Miss Bartlett, Miss Bartlett,&rdquo; moaned Cecil, again laying
      his hand over his eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s impossible,&rdquo; repeated Lucy. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want to make difficulties, but
      it really isn&rsquo;t fair on the maids to fill up the house so.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Alas!
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The truth is, dear, you don&rsquo;t like Charlotte.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I don&rsquo;t. And no more does Cecil. She gets on our nerves. You haven&rsquo;t
      seen her lately, and don&rsquo;t realize how tiresome she can be, though so
      good. So please, mother, don&rsquo;t worry us this last summer; but spoil us by
      not asking her to come.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hear, hear!&rdquo; said Cecil.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Honeychurch, with more gravity than usual, and with more feeling than
      she usually permitted herself, replied: &ldquo;This isn&rsquo;t very kind of you two.
      You have each other and all these woods to walk in, so full of beautiful
      things; and poor Charlotte has only the water turned off and plumbers. You
      are young, dears, and however clever young people are, and however many
      books they read, they will never guess what it feels like to grow old.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil crumbled his bread.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I must say Cousin Charlotte was very kind to me that year I called on my
      bike,&rdquo; put in Freddy. &ldquo;She thanked me for coming till I felt like such a
      fool, and fussed round no end to get an egg boiled for my tea just right.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know, dear. She is kind to everyone, and yet Lucy makes this
      difficulty when we try to give her some little return.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But Lucy hardened her heart. It was no good being kind to Miss Bartlett.
      She had tried herself too often and too recently. One might lay up
      treasure in heaven by the attempt, but one enriched neither Miss Bartlett
      nor any one else upon earth. She was reduced to saying: &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t help it,
      mother. I don&rsquo;t like Charlotte. I admit it&rsquo;s horrid of me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;From your own account, you told her as much.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, she would leave Florence so stupidly. She flurried&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The ghosts were returning; they filled Italy, they were even usurping the
      places she had known as a child. The Sacred Lake would never be the same
      again, and, on Sunday week, something would even happen to Windy Corner.
      How would she fight against ghosts? For a moment the visible world faded
      away, and memories and emotions alone seemed real.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suppose Miss Bartlett must come, since she boils eggs so well,&rdquo; said
      Cecil, who was in rather a happier frame of mind, thanks to the admirable
      cooking.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t mean the egg was WELL boiled,&rdquo; corrected Freddy, &ldquo;because in
      point of fact she forgot to take it off, and as a matter of fact I don&rsquo;t
      care for eggs. I only meant how jolly kind she seemed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil frowned again. Oh, these Honeychurches! Eggs, boilers, hydrangeas,
      maids&mdash;of such were their lives compact. &ldquo;May me and Lucy get down
      from our chairs?&rdquo; he asked, with scarcely veiled insolence. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want
      no dessert.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0014" id="link2HCH0014">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter XIV: How Lucy Faced the External Situation Bravely
    </h2>
    <p>
      Of course Miss Bartlett accepted. And, equally of course, she felt sure
      that she would prove a nuisance, and begged to be given an inferior spare
      room&mdash;something with no view, anything. Her love to Lucy. And,
      equally of course, George Emerson could come to tennis on the Sunday week.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy faced the situation bravely, though, like most of us, she only faced
      the situation that encompassed her. She never gazed inwards. If at times
      strange images rose from the depths, she put them down to nerves. When
      Cecil brought the Emersons to Summer Street, it had upset her nerves.
      Charlotte would burnish up past foolishness, and this might upset her
      nerves. She was nervous at night. When she talked to George&mdash;they met
      again almost immediately at the Rectory&mdash;his voice moved her deeply,
      and she wished to remain near him. How dreadful if she really wished to
      remain near him! Of course, the wish was due to nerves, which love to play
      such perverse tricks upon us. Once she had suffered from &ldquo;things that came
      out of nothing and meant she didn&rsquo;t know what.&rdquo; Now Cecil had explained
      psychology to her one wet afternoon, and all the troubles of youth in an
      unknown world could be dismissed.
    </p>
    <p>
      It is obvious enough for the reader to conclude, &ldquo;She loves young
      Emerson.&rdquo; A reader in Lucy&rsquo;s place would not find it obvious. Life is easy
      to chronicle, but bewildering to practice, and we welcome &ldquo;nerves&rdquo; or any
      other shibboleth that will cloak our personal desire. She loved Cecil;
      George made her nervous; will the reader explain to her that the phrases
      should have been reversed?
    </p>
    <p>
      But the external situation&mdash;she will face that bravely.
    </p>
    <p>
      The meeting at the Rectory had passed off well enough. Standing between
      Mr. Beebe and Cecil, she had made a few temperate allusions to Italy, and
      George had replied. She was anxious to show that she was not shy, and was
      glad that he did not seem shy either.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A nice fellow,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe afterwards &ldquo;He will work off his crudities
      in time. I rather mistrust young men who slip into life gracefully.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy said, &ldquo;He seems in better spirits. He laughs more.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; replied the clergyman. &ldquo;He is waking up.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      That was all. But, as the week wore on, more of her defences fell, and she
      entertained an image that had physical beauty. In spite of the clearest
      directions, Miss Bartlett contrived to bungle her arrival. She was due at
      the South-Eastern station at Dorking, whither Mrs. Honeychurch drove to
      meet her. She arrived at the London and Brighton station, and had to hire
      a cab up. No one was at home except Freddy and his friend, who had to stop
      their tennis and to entertain her for a solid hour. Cecil and Lucy turned
      up at four o&rsquo;clock, and these, with little Minnie Beebe, made a somewhat
      lugubrious sextette upon the upper lawn for tea.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I shall never forgive myself,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, who kept on rising
      from her seat, and had to be begged by the united company to remain. &ldquo;I
      have upset everything. Bursting in on young people! But I insist on paying
      for my cab up. Grant that, at any rate.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Our visitors never do such dreadful things,&rdquo; said Lucy, while her
      brother, in whose memory the boiled egg had already grown unsubstantial,
      exclaimed in irritable tones: &ldquo;Just what I&rsquo;ve been trying to convince
      Cousin Charlotte of, Lucy, for the last half hour.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I do not feel myself an ordinary visitor,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, and looked
      at her frayed glove.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right, if you&rsquo;d really rather. Five shillings, and I gave a bob to
      the driver.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett looked in her purse. Only sovereigns and pennies. Could any
      one give her change? Freddy had half a quid and his friend had four
      half-crowns. Miss Bartlett accepted their moneys and then said: &ldquo;But who
      am I to give the sovereign to?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s leave it all till mother comes back,&rdquo; suggested Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, dear; your mother may take quite a long drive now that she is not
      hampered with me. We all have our little foibles, and mine is the prompt
      settling of accounts.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Here Freddy&rsquo;s friend, Mr. Floyd, made the one remark of his that need be
      quoted: he offered to toss Freddy for Miss Bartlett&rsquo;s quid. A solution
      seemed in sight, and even Cecil, who had been ostentatiously drinking his
      tea at the view, felt the eternal attraction of Chance, and turned round.
    </p>
    <p>
      But this did not do, either.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Please&mdash;please&mdash;I know I am a sad spoil-sport, but it would make
      me wretched. I should practically be robbing the one who lost.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Freddy owes me fifteen shillings,&rdquo; interposed Cecil. &ldquo;So it will work out
      right if you give the pound to me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Fifteen shillings,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett dubiously. &ldquo;How is that, Mr.
      Vyse?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because, don&rsquo;t you see, Freddy paid your cab. Give me the pound, and we
      shall avoid this deplorable gambling.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett, who was poor at figures, became bewildered and rendered up
      the sovereign, amidst the suppressed gurgles of the other youths. For a
      moment Cecil was happy. He was playing at nonsense among his peers. Then
      he glanced at Lucy, in whose face petty anxieties had marred the smiles.
      In January he would rescue his Leonardo from this stupefying twaddle.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I don&rsquo;t see that!&rdquo; exclaimed Minnie Beebe who had narrowly watched
      the iniquitous transaction. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t see why Mr. Vyse is to have the
      quid.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because of the fifteen shillings and the five,&rdquo; they said solemnly.
      &ldquo;Fifteen shillings and five shillings make one pound, you see.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I don&rsquo;t see&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They tried to stifle her with cake.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, thank you. I&rsquo;m done. I don&rsquo;t see why&mdash;Freddy, don&rsquo;t poke me.
      Miss Honeychurch, your brother&rsquo;s hurting me. Ow! What about Mr. Floyd&rsquo;s
      ten shillings? Ow! No, I don&rsquo;t see and I never shall see why Miss
      What&rsquo;s-her-name shouldn&rsquo;t pay that bob for the driver.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I had forgotten the driver,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, reddening. &ldquo;Thank you,
      dear, for reminding me. A shilling was it? Can any one give me change for
      half a crown?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll get it,&rdquo; said the young hostess, rising with decision.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cecil, give me that sovereign. No, give me up that sovereign. I&rsquo;ll get
      Euphemia to change it, and we&rsquo;ll start the whole thing again from the
      beginning.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy&mdash;Lucy&mdash;what a nuisance I am!&rdquo; protested Miss Bartlett, and
      followed her across the lawn. Lucy tripped ahead, simulating hilarity.
      When they were out of earshot Miss Bartlett stopped her wails and said
      quite briskly: &ldquo;Have you told him about him yet?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I haven&rsquo;t,&rdquo; replied Lucy, and then could have bitten her tongue for
      understanding so quickly what her cousin meant. &ldquo;Let me see&mdash;a
      sovereign&rsquo;s worth of silver.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She escaped into the kitchen. Miss Bartlett&rsquo;s sudden transitions were too
      uncanny. It sometimes seemed as if she planned every word she spoke or
      caused to be spoken; as if all this worry about cabs and change had been a
      ruse to surprise the soul.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I haven&rsquo;t told Cecil or any one,&rdquo; she remarked, when she returned. &ldquo;I
      promised you I shouldn&rsquo;t. Here is your money&mdash;all shillings, except
      two half-crowns. Would you count it? You can settle your debt nicely now.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett was in the drawing-room, gazing at the photograph of St.
      John ascending, which had been framed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How dreadful!&rdquo; she murmured, &ldquo;how more than dreadful, if Mr. Vyse should
      come to hear of it from some other source.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, no, Charlotte,&rdquo; said the girl, entering the battle. &ldquo;George Emerson
      is all right, and what other source is there?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett considered. &ldquo;For instance, the driver. I saw him looking
      through the bushes at you, remember he had a violet between his teeth.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy shuddered a little. &ldquo;We shall get the silly affair on our nerves if
      we aren&rsquo;t careful. How could a Florentine cab-driver ever get hold of
      Cecil?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We must think of every possibility.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, it&rsquo;s all right.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Or perhaps old Mr. Emerson knows. In fact, he is certain to know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t care if he does. I was grateful to you for your letter, but even
      if the news does get round, I think I can trust Cecil to laugh at it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To contradict it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, to laugh at it.&rdquo; But she knew in her heart that she could not trust
      him, for he desired her untouched.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well, dear, you know best. Perhaps gentlemen are different to what
      they were when I was young. Ladies are certainly different.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now, Charlotte!&rdquo; She struck at her playfully. &ldquo;You kind, anxious thing.
      What WOULD you have me do? First you say &lsquo;Don&rsquo;t tell&rsquo;; and then you say,
      &lsquo;Tell&rsquo;. Which is it to be? Quick!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett sighed &ldquo;I am no match for you in conversation, dearest. I
      blush when I think how I interfered at Florence, and you so well able to
      look after yourself, and so much cleverer in all ways than I am. You will
      never forgive me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Shall we go out, then. They will smash all the china if we don&rsquo;t.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      For the air rang with the shrieks of Minnie, who was being scalped with a
      teaspoon.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dear, one moment&mdash;we may not have this chance for a chat again. Have
      you seen the young one yet?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I have.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What happened?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We met at the Rectory.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What line is he taking up?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No line. He talked about Italy, like any other person. It is really all
      right. What advantage would he get from being a cad, to put it bluntly? I
      do wish I could make you see it my way. He really won&rsquo;t be any nuisance,
      Charlotte.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Once a cad, always a cad. That is my poor opinion.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy paused. &ldquo;Cecil said one day&mdash;and I thought it so profound&mdash;that
      there are two kinds of cads&mdash;the conscious and the subconscious.&rdquo; She
      paused again, to be sure of doing justice to Cecil&rsquo;s profundity. Through
      the window she saw Cecil himself, turning over the pages of a novel. It
      was a new one from Smith&rsquo;s library. Her mother must have returned from the
      station.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Once a cad, always a cad,&rdquo; droned Miss Bartlett.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What I mean by subconscious is that Emerson lost his head. I fell into
      all those violets, and he was silly and surprised. I don&rsquo;t think we ought
      to blame him very much. It makes such a difference when you see a person
      with beautiful things behind him unexpectedly. It really does; it makes an
      enormous difference, and he lost his head: he doesn&rsquo;t admire me, or any of
      that nonsense, one straw. Freddy rather likes him, and has asked him up
      here on Sunday, so you can judge for yourself. He has improved; he doesn&rsquo;t
      always look as if he&rsquo;s going to burst into tears. He is a clerk in the
      General Manager&rsquo;s office at one of the big railways&mdash;not a porter!
      and runs down to his father for week-ends. Papa was to do with journalism,
      but is rheumatic and has retired. There! Now for the garden.&rdquo; She took
      hold of her guest by the arm. &ldquo;Suppose we don&rsquo;t talk about this silly
      Italian business any more. We want you to have a nice restful visit at
      Windy Corner, with no worriting.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy thought this rather a good speech. The reader may have detected an
      unfortunate slip in it. Whether Miss Bartlett detected the slip one cannot
      say, for it is impossible to penetrate into the minds of elderly people.
      She might have spoken further, but they were interrupted by the entrance
      of her hostess. Explanations took place, and in the midst of them Lucy
      escaped, the images throbbing a little more vividly in her brain.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0015" id="link2HCH0015">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter XV: The Disaster Within
    </h2>
    <p>
      The Sunday after Miss Bartlett&rsquo;s arrival was a glorious day, like most of
      the days of that year. In the Weald, autumn approached, breaking up the
      green monotony of summer, touching the parks with the grey bloom of mist,
      the beech-trees with russet, the oak-trees with gold. Up on the heights,
      battalions of black pines witnessed the change, themselves unchangeable.
      Either country was spanned by a cloudless sky, and in either arose the
      tinkle of church bells.
    </p>
    <p>
      The garden of Windy Corners was deserted except for a red book, which lay
      sunning itself upon the gravel path. From the house came incoherent
      sounds, as of females preparing for worship. &ldquo;The men say they won&rsquo;t go&rdquo;&mdash;&ldquo;Well,
      I don&rsquo;t blame them&rdquo;&mdash;Minnie says, &ldquo;need she go?&rdquo;&mdash;&ldquo;Tell her, no
      nonsense&rdquo;&mdash;&ldquo;Anne! Mary! Hook me behind!&rdquo;&mdash;&ldquo;Dearest Lucia, may I
      trespass upon you for a pin?&rdquo; For Miss Bartlett had announced that she at
      all events was one for church.
    </p>
    <p>
      The sun rose higher on its journey, guided, not by Phaethon, but by
      Apollo, competent, unswerving, divine. Its rays fell on the ladies
      whenever they advanced towards the bedroom windows; on Mr. Beebe down at
      Summer Street as he smiled over a letter from Miss Catharine Alan; on
      George Emerson cleaning his father&rsquo;s boots; and lastly, to complete the
      catalogue of memorable things, on the red book mentioned previously. The
      ladies move, Mr. Beebe moves, George moves, and movement may engender
      shadow. But this book lies motionless, to be caressed all the morning by
      the sun and to raise its covers slightly, as though acknowledging the
      caress.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently Lucy steps out of the drawing-room window. Her new cerise dress
      has been a failure, and makes her look tawdry and wan. At her throat is a
      garnet brooch, on her finger a ring set with rubies&mdash;an engagement
      ring. Her eyes are bent to the Weald. She frowns a little&mdash;not in
      anger, but as a brave child frowns when he is trying not to cry. In all
      that expanse no human eye is looking at her, and she may frown unrebuked
      and measure the spaces that yet survive between Apollo and the western
      hills.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy! Lucy! What&rsquo;s that book? Who&rsquo;s been taking a book out of the shelf
      and leaving it about to spoil?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s only the library book that Cecil&rsquo;s been reading.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But pick it up, and don&rsquo;t stand idling there like a flamingo.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy picked up the book and glanced at the title listlessly, Under a
      Loggia. She no longer read novels herself, devoting all her spare time to
      solid literature in the hope of catching Cecil up. It was dreadful how
      little she knew, and even when she thought she knew a thing, like the
      Italian painters, she found she had forgotten it. Only this morning she
      had confused Francesco Francia with Piero della Francesca, and Cecil had
      said, &ldquo;What! you aren&rsquo;t forgetting your Italy already?&rdquo; And this too had
      lent anxiety to her eyes when she saluted the dear view and the dear
      garden in the foreground, and above them, scarcely conceivable elsewhere,
      the dear sun.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy&mdash;have you a sixpence for Minnie and a shilling for yourself?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She hastened in to her mother, who was rapidly working herself into a
      Sunday fluster.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a special collection&mdash;I forget what for. I do beg, no vulgar
      clinking in the plate with halfpennies; see that Minnie has a nice bright
      sixpence. Where is the child? Minnie! That book&rsquo;s all warped. (Gracious,
      how plain you look!) Put it under the Atlas to press. Minnie!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Mrs. Honeychurch&mdash;&rdquo; from the upper regions.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Minnie, don&rsquo;t be late. Here comes the horse&rdquo;&mdash;it was always the
      horse, never the carriage. &ldquo;Where&rsquo;s Charlotte? Run up and hurry her. Why
      is she so long? She had nothing to do. She never brings anything but
      blouses. Poor Charlotte&mdash;How I do detest blouses! Minnie!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Paganism is infectious&mdash;more infectious than diphtheria or piety&mdash;and
      the Rector&rsquo;s niece was taken to church protesting. As usual, she didn&rsquo;t
      see why. Why shouldn&rsquo;t she sit in the sun with the young men? The young
      men, who had now appeared, mocked her with ungenerous words. Mrs.
      Honeychurch defended orthodoxy, and in the midst of the confusion Miss
      Bartlett, dressed in the very height of the fashion, came strolling down
      the stairs.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dear Marian, I am very sorry, but I have no small change&mdash;nothing
      but sovereigns and half crowns. Could any one give me&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, easily. Jump in. Gracious me, how smart you look! What a lovely
      frock! You put us all to shame.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If I did not wear my best rags and tatters now, when should I wear them?&rdquo;
       said Miss Bartlett reproachfully. She got into the victoria and placed
      herself with her back to the horse. The necessary roar ensued, and then
      they drove off.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good-bye! Be good!&rdquo; called out Cecil.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy bit her lip, for the tone was sneering. On the subject of &ldquo;church and
      so on&rdquo; they had had rather an unsatisfactory conversation. He had said
      that people ought to overhaul themselves, and she did not want to overhaul
      herself; she did not know it was done. Honest orthodoxy Cecil respected,
      but he always assumed that honesty is the result of a spiritual crisis; he
      could not imagine it as a natural birthright, that might grow heavenward
      like flowers. All that he said on this subject pained her, though he
      exuded tolerance from every pore; somehow the Emersons were different.
    </p>
    <p>
      She saw the Emersons after church. There was a line of carriages down the
      road, and the Honeychurch vehicle happened to be opposite Cissie Villa. To
      save time, they walked over the green to it, and found father and son
      smoking in the garden.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Introduce me,&rdquo; said her mother. &ldquo;Unless the young man considers that he
      knows me already.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He probably did; but Lucy ignored the Sacred Lake and introduced them
      formally. Old Mr. Emerson claimed her with much warmth, and said how glad
      he was that she was going to be married. She said yes, she was glad too;
      and then, as Miss Bartlett and Minnie were lingering behind with Mr.
      Beebe, she turned the conversation to a less disturbing topic, and asked
      him how he liked his new house.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very much,&rdquo; he replied, but there was a note of offence in his voice; she
      had never known him offended before. He added: &ldquo;We find, though, that the
      Miss Alans were coming, and that we have turned them out. Women mind such
      a thing. I am very much upset about it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I believe that there was some misunderstanding,&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch
      uneasily.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Our landlord was told that we should be a different type of person,&rdquo; said
      George, who seemed disposed to carry the matter further. &ldquo;He thought we
      should be artistic. He is disappointed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And I wonder whether we ought to write to the Miss Alans and offer to
      give it up. What do you think?&rdquo; He appealed to Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, stop now you have come,&rdquo; said Lucy lightly. She must avoid censuring
      Cecil. For it was on Cecil that the little episode turned, though his name
      was never mentioned.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So George says. He says that the Miss Alans must go to the wall. Yet it
      does seem so unkind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is only a certain amount of kindness in the world,&rdquo; said George,
      watching the sunlight flash on the panels of the passing carriages.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes!&rdquo; exclaimed Mrs. Honeychurch. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s exactly what I say. Why all
      this twiddling and twaddling over two Miss Alans?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is a certain amount of kindness, just as there is a certain amount
      of light,&rdquo; he continued in measured tones. &ldquo;We cast a shadow on something
      wherever we stand, and it is no good moving from place to place to save
      things; because the shadow always follows. Choose a place where you won&rsquo;t
      do harm&mdash;yes, choose a place where you won&rsquo;t do very much harm, and
      stand in it for all you are worth, facing the sunshine.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Mr. Emerson, I see you&rsquo;re clever!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eh&mdash;?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I see you&rsquo;re going to be clever. I hope you didn&rsquo;t go behaving like that
      to poor Freddy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      George&rsquo;s eyes laughed, and Lucy suspected that he and her mother would get
      on rather well.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I didn&rsquo;t,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;He behaved that way to me. It is his philosophy.
      Only he starts life with it; and I have tried the Note of Interrogation
      first.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What DO you mean? No, never mind what you mean. Don&rsquo;t explain. He looks
      forward to seeing you this afternoon. Do you play tennis? Do you mind
      tennis on Sunday&mdash;?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;George mind tennis on Sunday! George, after his education, distinguish
      between Sunday&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well, George doesn&rsquo;t mind tennis on Sunday. No more do I. That&rsquo;s
      settled. Mr. Emerson, if you could come with your son we should be so
      pleased.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He thanked her, but the walk sounded rather far; he could only potter
      about in these days.
    </p>
    <p>
      She turned to George: &ldquo;And then he wants to give up his house to the Miss
      Alans.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know,&rdquo; said George, and put his arm round his father&rsquo;s neck. The
      kindness that Mr. Beebe and Lucy had always known to exist in him came out
      suddenly, like sunlight touching a vast landscape&mdash;a touch of the
      morning sun? She remembered that in all his perversities he had never
      spoken against affection.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett approached.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You know our cousin, Miss Bartlett,&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch pleasantly.
      &ldquo;You met her with my daughter in Florence.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, indeed!&rdquo; said the old man, and made as if he would come out of the
      garden to meet the lady. Miss Bartlett promptly got into the victoria.
      Thus entrenched, she emitted a formal bow. It was the pension Bertolini
      again, the dining-table with the decanters of water and wine. It was the
      old, old battle of the room with the view.
    </p>
    <p>
      George did not respond to the bow. Like any boy, he blushed and was
      ashamed; he knew that the chaperon remembered. He said: &ldquo;I&mdash;I&rsquo;ll come
      up to tennis if I can manage it,&rdquo; and went into the house. Perhaps
      anything that he did would have pleased Lucy, but his awkwardness went
      straight to her heart; men were not gods after all, but as human and as
      clumsy as girls; even men might suffer from unexplained desires, and need
      help. To one of her upbringing, and of her destination, the weakness of
      men was a truth unfamiliar, but she had surmised it at Florence, when
      George threw her photographs into the River Arno.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;George, don&rsquo;t go,&rdquo; cried his father, who thought it a great treat for
      people if his son would talk to them. &ldquo;George has been in such good
      spirits today, and I am sure he will end by coming up this afternoon.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy caught her cousin&rsquo;s eye. Something in its mute appeal made her
      reckless. &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; she said, raising her voice, &ldquo;I do hope he will.&rdquo; Then
      she went to the carriage and murmured, &ldquo;The old man hasn&rsquo;t been told; I
      knew it was all right.&rdquo; Mrs. Honeychurch followed her, and they drove
      away.
    </p>
    <p>
      Satisfactory that Mr. Emerson had not been told of the Florence escapade;
      yet Lucy&rsquo;s spirits should not have leapt up as if she had sighted the
      ramparts of heaven. Satisfactory; yet surely she greeted it with
      disproportionate joy. All the way home the horses&rsquo; hoofs sang a tune to
      her: &ldquo;He has not told, he has not told.&rdquo; Her brain expanded the melody:
      &ldquo;He has not told his father&mdash;to whom he tells all things. It was not
      an exploit. He did not laugh at me when I had gone.&rdquo; She raised her hand
      to her cheek. &ldquo;He does not love me. No. How terrible if he did! But he has
      not told. He will not tell.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She longed to shout the words: &ldquo;It is all right. It&rsquo;s a secret between us
      two for ever. Cecil will never hear.&rdquo; She was even glad that Miss Bartlett
      had made her promise secrecy, that last dark evening at Florence, when
      they had knelt packing in his room. The secret, big or little, was
      guarded.
    </p>
    <p>
      Only three English people knew of it in the world. Thus she interpreted
      her joy. She greeted Cecil with unusual radiance, because she felt so
      safe. As he helped her out of the carriage, she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Emersons have been so nice. George Emerson has improved enormously.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How are my proteges?&rdquo; asked Cecil, who took no real interest in them, and
      had long since forgotten his resolution to bring them to Windy Corner for
      educational purposes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Proteges!&rdquo; she exclaimed with some warmth. For the only relationship
      which Cecil conceived was feudal: that of protector and protected. He had
      no glimpse of the comradeship after which the girl&rsquo;s soul yearned.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You shall see for yourself how your proteges are. George Emerson is
      coming up this afternoon. He is a most interesting man to talk to. Only
      don&rsquo;t&mdash;&rdquo; She nearly said, &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t protect him.&rdquo; But the bell was
      ringing for lunch, and, as often happened, Cecil had paid no great
      attention to her remarks. Charm, not argument, was to be her forte.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lunch was a cheerful meal. Generally Lucy was depressed at meals. Some one
      had to be soothed&mdash;either Cecil or Miss Bartlett or a Being not
      visible to the mortal eye&mdash;a Being who whispered to her soul: &ldquo;It
      will not last, this cheerfulness. In January you must go to London to
      entertain the grandchildren of celebrated men.&rdquo; But to-day she felt she
      had received a guarantee. Her mother would always sit there, her brother
      here. The sun, though it had moved a little since the morning, would never
      be hidden behind the western hills. After luncheon they asked her to play.
      She had seen Gluck&rsquo;s Armide that year, and played from memory the music of
      the enchanted garden&mdash;the music to which Renaud approaches, beneath
      the light of an eternal dawn, the music that never gains, never wanes, but
      ripples for ever like the tideless seas of fairyland. Such music is not
      for the piano, and her audience began to get restive, and Cecil, sharing
      the discontent, called out: &ldquo;Now play us the other garden&mdash;the one in
      Parsifal.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She closed the instrument.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not very dutiful,&rdquo; said her mother&rsquo;s voice.
    </p>
    <p>
      Fearing that she had offended Cecil, she turned quickly round. There
      George was. He had crept in without interrupting her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, I had no idea!&rdquo; she exclaimed, getting very red; and then, without a
      word of greeting, she reopened the piano. Cecil should have the Parsifal,
      and anything else that he liked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Our performer has changed her mind,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, perhaps
      implying, she will play the music to Mr. Emerson. Lucy did not know what
      to do nor even what she wanted to do. She played a few bars of the Flower
      Maidens&rsquo; song very badly and then she stopped.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I vote tennis,&rdquo; said Freddy, disgusted at the scrappy entertainment.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, so do I.&rdquo; Once more she closed the unfortunate piano. &ldquo;I vote you
      have a men&rsquo;s four.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not for me, thank you,&rdquo; said Cecil. &ldquo;I will not spoil the set.&rdquo; He never
      realized that it may be an act of kindness in a bad player to make up a
      fourth.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, come along Cecil. I&rsquo;m bad, Floyd&rsquo;s rotten, and so I dare say&rsquo;s
      Emerson.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      George corrected him: &ldquo;I am not bad.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      One looked down one&rsquo;s nose at this. &ldquo;Then certainly I won&rsquo;t play,&rdquo; said
      Cecil, while Miss Bartlett, under the impression that she was snubbing
      George, added: &ldquo;I agree with you, Mr. Vyse. You had much better not play.
      Much better not.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Minnie, rushing in where Cecil feared to tread, announced that she would
      play. &ldquo;I shall miss every ball anyway, so what does it matter?&rdquo; But Sunday
      intervened and stamped heavily upon the kindly suggestion.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then it will have to be Lucy,&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch; &ldquo;you must fall back
      on Lucy. There is no other way out of it. Lucy, go and change your frock.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy&rsquo;s Sabbath was generally of this amphibious nature. She kept it
      without hypocrisy in the morning, and broke it without reluctance in the
      afternoon. As she changed her frock, she wondered whether Cecil was
      sneering at her; really she must overhaul herself and settle everything up
      before she married him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Floyd was her partner. She liked music, but how much better tennis
      seemed. How much better to run about in comfortable clothes than to sit at
      the piano and feel girt under the arms. Once more music appeared to her
      the employment of a child. George served, and surprised her by his anxiety
      to win. She remembered how he had sighed among the tombs at Santa Croce
      because things wouldn&rsquo;t fit; how after the death of that obscure Italian
      he had leant over the parapet by the Arno and said to her: &ldquo;I shall want
      to live, I tell you.&rdquo; He wanted to live now, to win at tennis, to stand
      for all he was worth in the sun&mdash;the sun which had begun to decline
      and was shining in her eyes; and he did win.
    </p>
    <p>
      Ah, how beautiful the Weald looked! The hills stood out above its
      radiance, as Fiesole stands above the Tuscan Plain, and the South Downs,
      if one chose, were the mountains of Carrara. She might be forgetting her
      Italy, but she was noticing more things in her England. One could play a
      new game with the view, and try to find in its innumerable folds some town
      or village that would do for Florence. Ah, how beautiful the Weald looked!
    </p>
    <p>
      But now Cecil claimed her. He chanced to be in a lucid critical mood, and
      would not sympathize with exaltation. He had been rather a nuisance all
      through the tennis, for the novel that he was reading was so bad that he
      was obliged to read it aloud to others. He would stroll round the
      precincts of the court and call out: &ldquo;I say, listen to this, Lucy. Three
      split infinitives.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dreadful!&rdquo; said Lucy, and missed her stroke. When they had finished their
      set, he still went on reading; there was some murder scene, and really
      everyone must listen to it. Freddy and Mr. Floyd were obliged to hunt for
      a lost ball in the laurels, but the other two acquiesced.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The scene is laid in Florence.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What fun, Cecil! Read away. Come, Mr. Emerson, sit down after all your
      energy.&rdquo; She had &ldquo;forgiven&rdquo; George, as she put it, and she made a point of
      being pleasant to him.
    </p>
    <p>
      He jumped over the net and sat down at her feet asking: &ldquo;You&mdash;and are
      you tired?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course I&rsquo;m not!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you mind being beaten?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She was going to answer, &ldquo;No,&rdquo; when it struck her that she did mind, so
      she answered, &ldquo;Yes.&rdquo; She added merrily, &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t see you&rsquo;re such a
      splendid player, though. The light was behind you, and it was in my eyes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I never said I was.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, you did!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You didn&rsquo;t attend.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You said&mdash;oh, don&rsquo;t go in for accuracy at this house. We all
      exaggerate, and we get very angry with people who don&rsquo;t.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;The scene is laid in Florence,&rsquo;&rdquo; repeated Cecil, with an upward note.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy recollected herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Sunset. Leonora was speeding&mdash;&lsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy interrupted. &ldquo;Leonora? Is Leonora the heroine? Who&rsquo;s the book by?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Joseph Emery Prank. &lsquo;Sunset. Leonora speeding across the square. Pray the
      saints she might not arrive too late. Sunset&mdash;the sunset of Italy.
      Under Orcagna&rsquo;s Loggia&mdash;the Loggia de&rsquo; Lanzi, as we sometimes call it
      now&mdash;&lsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy burst into laughter. &ldquo;&lsquo;Joseph Emery Prank&rsquo; indeed! Why it&rsquo;s Miss
      Lavish! It&rsquo;s Miss Lavish&rsquo;s novel, and she&rsquo;s publishing it under somebody
      else&rsquo;s name.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who may Miss Lavish be?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, a dreadful person&mdash;Mr. Emerson, you remember Miss Lavish?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Excited by her pleasant afternoon, she clapped her hands.
    </p>
    <p>
      George looked up. &ldquo;Of course I do. I saw her the day I arrived at Summer
      Street. It was she who told me that you lived here.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Weren&rsquo;t you pleased?&rdquo; She meant &ldquo;to see Miss Lavish,&rdquo; but when he bent
      down to the grass without replying, it struck her that she could mean
      something else. She watched his head, which was almost resting against her
      knee, and she thought that the ears were reddening. &ldquo;No wonder the novel&rsquo;s
      bad,&rdquo; she added. &ldquo;I never liked Miss Lavish. But I suppose one ought to
      read it as one&rsquo;s met her.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All modern books are bad,&rdquo; said Cecil, who was annoyed at her
      inattention, and vented his annoyance on literature. &ldquo;Every one writes for
      money in these days.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Cecil&mdash;!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is so. I will inflict Joseph Emery Prank on you no longer.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil, this afternoon seemed such a twittering sparrow. The ups and downs
      in his voice were noticeable, but they did not affect her. She had dwelt
      amongst melody and movement, and her nerves refused to answer to the clang
      of his. Leaving him to be annoyed, she gazed at the black head again. She
      did not want to stroke it, but she saw herself wanting to stroke it; the
      sensation was curious.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you like this view of ours, Mr. Emerson?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I never notice much difference in views.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because they&rsquo;re all alike. Because all that matters in them is distance
      and air.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;H&rsquo;m!&rdquo; said Cecil, uncertain whether the remark was striking or not.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My father&rdquo;&mdash;he looked up at her (and he was a little flushed)&mdash;&ldquo;says
      that there is only one perfect view&mdash;the view of the sky straight
      over our heads, and that all these views on earth are but bungled copies
      of it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I expect your father has been reading Dante,&rdquo; said Cecil, fingering the
      novel, which alone permitted him to lead the conversation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He told us another day that views are really crowds&mdash;crowds of trees
      and houses and hills&mdash;and are bound to resemble each other, like
      human crowds&mdash;and that the power they have over us is sometimes
      supernatural, for the same reason.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy&rsquo;s lips parted.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;For a crowd is more than the people who make it up. Something gets added
      to it&mdash;no one knows how&mdash;just as something has got added to
      those hills.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He pointed with his racquet to the South Downs.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What a splendid idea!&rdquo; she murmured. &ldquo;I shall enjoy hearing your father
      talk again. I&rsquo;m so sorry he&rsquo;s not so well.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, he isn&rsquo;t well.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There&rsquo;s an absurd account of a view in this book,&rdquo; said Cecil. &ldquo;Also that
      men fall into two classes&mdash;those who forget views and those who
      remember them, even in small rooms.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Emerson, have you any brothers or sisters?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;None. Why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You spoke of &lsquo;us.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My mother, I was meaning.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil closed the novel with a bang.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Cecil&mdash;how you made me jump!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I will inflict Joseph Emery Prank on you no longer.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can just remember us all three going into the country for the day and
      seeing as far as Hindhead. It is the first thing that I remember.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil got up; the man was ill-bred&mdash;he hadn&rsquo;t put on his coat after
      tennis&mdash;he didn&rsquo;t do. He would have strolled away if Lucy had not
      stopped him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cecil, do read the thing about the view.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not while Mr. Emerson is here to entertain us.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;read away. I think nothing&rsquo;s funnier than to hear silly things
      read out loud. If Mr. Emerson thinks us frivolous, he can go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      This struck Cecil as subtle, and pleased him. It put their visitor in the
      position of a prig. Somewhat mollified, he sat down again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Emerson, go and find tennis balls.&rdquo; She opened the book. Cecil must
      have his reading and anything else that he liked. But her attention
      wandered to George&rsquo;s mother, who&mdash;according to Mr. Eager&mdash;had
      been murdered in the sight of God and&mdash;according to her son&mdash;had seen as
      far as Hindhead.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Am I really to go?&rdquo; asked George.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, of course not really,&rdquo; she answered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Chapter two,&rdquo; said Cecil, yawning. &ldquo;Find me chapter two, if it isn&rsquo;t
      bothering you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Chapter two was found, and she glanced at its opening sentences.
    </p>
    <p>
      She thought she had gone mad.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Here&mdash;hand me the book.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She heard her voice saying: &ldquo;It isn&rsquo;t worth reading&mdash;it&rsquo;s too silly
      to read&mdash;I never saw such rubbish&mdash;it oughtn&rsquo;t to be allowed to
      be printed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He took the book from her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Leonora,&rsquo;&rdquo; he read, &ldquo;&lsquo;sat pensive and alone. Before her lay the rich
      champaign of Tuscany, dotted over with many a smiling village. The season
      was spring.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Lavish knew, somehow, and had printed the past in draggled prose, for
      Cecil to read and for George to hear.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;A golden haze,&rsquo;&rdquo; he read. He read: &ldquo;&lsquo;Afar off the towers of Florence,
      while the bank on which she sat was carpeted with violets. All unobserved
      Antonio stole up behind her&mdash;&lsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lest Cecil should see her face she turned to George and saw his face.
    </p>
    <p>
      He read: &ldquo;&lsquo;There came from his lips no wordy protestation such as formal
      lovers use. No eloquence was his, nor did he suffer from the lack of it.
      He simply enfolded her in his manly arms.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This isn&rsquo;t the passage I wanted,&rdquo; he informed them, &ldquo;there is another
      much funnier, further on.&rdquo; He turned over the leaves.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Should we go in to tea?&rdquo; said Lucy, whose voice remained steady.
    </p>
    <p>
      She led the way up the garden, Cecil following her, George last. She
      thought a disaster was averted. But when they entered the shrubbery it
      came. The book, as if it had not worked mischief enough, had been
      forgotten, and Cecil must go back for it; and George, who loved
      passionately, must blunder against her in the narrow path.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;&rdquo; she gasped, and, for the second time, was kissed by him.
    </p>
    <p>
      As if no more was possible, he slipped back; Cecil rejoined her; they
      reached the upper lawn alone.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0017" id="link2HCH0017">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter XVI: Lying to George
    </h2>
    <p>
      But Lucy had developed since the spring. That is to say, she was now
      better able to stifle the emotions of which the conventions and the world
      disapprove. Though the danger was greater, she was not shaken by deep
      sobs. She said to Cecil, &ldquo;I am not coming in to tea&mdash;tell mother&mdash;I
      must write some letters,&rdquo; and went up to her room. Then she prepared for
      action. Love felt and returned, love which our bodies exact and our hearts
      have transfigured, love which is the most real thing that we shall ever
      meet, reappeared now as the world&rsquo;s enemy, and she must stifle it.
    </p>
    <p>
      She sent for Miss Bartlett.
    </p>
    <p>
      The contest lay not between love and duty. Perhaps there never is such a
      contest. It lay between the real and the pretended, and Lucy&rsquo;s first aim
      was to defeat herself. As her brain clouded over, as the memory of the
      views grew dim and the words of the book died away, she returned to her
      old shibboleth of nerves. She &ldquo;conquered her breakdown.&rdquo; Tampering with
      the truth, she forgot that the truth had ever been. Remembering that she
      was engaged to Cecil, she compelled herself to confused remembrances of
      George; he was nothing to her; he never had been anything; he had behaved
      abominably; she had never encouraged him. The armour of falsehood is
      subtly wrought out of darkness, and hides a man not only from others, but
      from his own soul. In a few moments Lucy was equipped for battle.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Something too awful has happened,&rdquo; she began, as soon as her cousin
      arrived. &ldquo;Do you know anything about Miss Lavish&rsquo;s novel?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett looked surprised, and said that she had not read the book,
      nor known that it was published; Eleanor was a reticent woman at heart.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is a scene in it. The hero and heroine make love. Do you know about
      that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dear&mdash;?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you know about it, please?&rdquo; she repeated. &ldquo;They are on a hillside, and
      Florence is in the distance.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My good Lucia, I am all at sea. I know nothing about it whatever.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There are violets. I cannot believe it is a coincidence. Charlotte,
      Charlotte, how could you have told her? I have thought before speaking; it
      must be you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Told her what?&rdquo; she asked, with growing agitation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;About that dreadful afternoon in February.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett was genuinely moved. &ldquo;Oh, Lucy, dearest girl&mdash;she
      hasn&rsquo;t put that in her book?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy nodded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not so that one could recognize it. Yes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then never&mdash;never&mdash;never more shall Eleanor Lavish be a friend
      of mine.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So you did tell?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I did just happen&mdash;when I had tea with her at Rome&mdash;in the
      course of conversation&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But Charlotte&mdash;what about the promise you gave me when we were
      packing? Why did you tell Miss Lavish, when you wouldn&rsquo;t even let me tell
      mother?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I will never forgive Eleanor. She has betrayed my confidence.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why did you tell her, though? This is a most serious thing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Why does any one tell anything? The question is eternal, and it was not
      surprising that Miss Bartlett should only sigh faintly in response. She
      had done wrong&mdash;she admitted it, she only hoped that she had not done
      harm; she had told Eleanor in the strictest confidence.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy stamped with irritation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cecil happened to read out the passage aloud to me and to Mr. Emerson; it
      upset Mr. Emerson and he insulted me again. Behind Cecil&rsquo;s back. Ugh! Is
      it possible that men are such brutes? Behind Cecil&rsquo;s back as we were
      walking up the garden.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett burst into self-accusations and regrets.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is to be done now? Can you tell me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Lucy&mdash;I shall never forgive myself, never to my dying day. Fancy
      if your prospects&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know,&rdquo; said Lucy, wincing at the word. &ldquo;I see now why you wanted me to
      tell Cecil, and what you meant by &lsquo;some other source.&rsquo; You knew that you
      had told Miss Lavish, and that she was not reliable.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It was Miss Bartlett&rsquo;s turn to wince. &ldquo;However,&rdquo; said the girl, despising
      her cousin&rsquo;s shiftiness, &ldquo;What&rsquo;s done&rsquo;s done. You have put me in a most
      awkward position. How am I to get out of it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett could not think. The days of her energy were over. She was a
      visitor, not a chaperon, and a discredited visitor at that. She stood with
      clasped hands while the girl worked herself into the necessary rage.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He must&mdash;that man must have such a setting down that he won&rsquo;t
      forget. And who&rsquo;s to give it him? I can&rsquo;t tell mother now&mdash;owing to
      you. Nor Cecil, Charlotte, owing to you. I am caught up every way. I think
      I shall go mad. I have no one to help me. That&rsquo;s why I&rsquo;ve sent for you.
      What&rsquo;s wanted is a man with a whip.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett agreed: one wanted a man with a whip.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes&mdash;but it&rsquo;s no good agreeing. What&rsquo;s to be DONE. We women go
      maundering on. What DOES a girl do when she comes across a cad?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I always said he was a cad, dear. Give me credit for that, at all events.
      From the very first moment&mdash;when he said his father was having a
      bath.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, bother the credit and who&rsquo;s been right or wrong! We&rsquo;ve both made a
      muddle of it. George Emerson is still down the garden there, and is he to
      be left unpunished, or isn&rsquo;t he? I want to know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett was absolutely helpless. Her own exposure had unnerved her,
      and thoughts were colliding painfully in her brain. She moved feebly to
      the window, and tried to detect the cad&rsquo;s white flannels among the
      laurels.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You were ready enough at the Bertolini when you rushed me off to Rome.
      Can&rsquo;t you speak again to him now?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Willingly would I move heaven and earth&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want something more definite,&rdquo; said Lucy contemptuously. &ldquo;Will you
      speak to him? It is the least you can do, surely, considering it all
      happened because you broke your word.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Never again shall Eleanor Lavish be a friend of mine.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Really, Charlotte was outdoing herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes or no, please; yes or no.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is the kind of thing that only a gentleman can settle.&rdquo; George Emerson
      was coming up the garden with a tennis ball in his hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well,&rdquo; said Lucy, with an angry gesture. &ldquo;No one will help me. I
      will speak to him myself.&rdquo; And immediately she realized that this was what
      her cousin had intended all along.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hullo, Emerson!&rdquo; called Freddy from below. &ldquo;Found the lost ball? Good
      man! Want any tea?&rdquo; And there was an irruption from the house on to the
      terrace.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Lucy, but that is brave of you! I admire you&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They had gathered round George, who beckoned, she felt, over the rubbish,
      the sloppy thoughts, the furtive yearnings that were beginning to cumber
      her soul. Her anger faded at the sight of him. Ah! The Emersons were fine
      people in their way. She had to subdue a rush in her blood before saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Freddy has taken him into the dining-room. The others are going down the
      garden. Come. Let us get this over quickly. Come. I want you in the room,
      of course.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy, do you mind doing it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How can you ask such a ridiculous question?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Poor Lucy&mdash;&rdquo; She stretched out her hand. &ldquo;I seem to bring nothing
      but misfortune wherever I go.&rdquo; Lucy nodded. She remembered their last
      evening at Florence&mdash;the packing, the candle, the shadow of Miss
      Bartlett&rsquo;s toque on the door. She was not to be trapped by pathos a second
      time. Eluding her cousin&rsquo;s caress, she led the way downstairs.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Try the jam,&rdquo; Freddy was saying. &ldquo;The jam&rsquo;s jolly good.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      George, looking big and dishevelled, was pacing up and down the
      dining-room. As she entered he stopped, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;nothing to eat.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You go down to the others,&rdquo; said Lucy; &ldquo;Charlotte and I will give Mr.
      Emerson all he wants. Where&rsquo;s mother?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She&rsquo;s started on her Sunday writing. She&rsquo;s in the drawing-room.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s all right. You go away.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He went off singing.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy sat down at the table. Miss Bartlett, who was thoroughly frightened,
      took up a book and pretended to read.
    </p>
    <p>
      She would not be drawn into an elaborate speech. She just said: &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t
      have it, Mr. Emerson. I cannot even talk to you. Go out of this house, and
      never come into it again as long as I live here&mdash;&rdquo; flushing as she
      spoke and pointing to the door. &ldquo;I hate a row. Go please.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No discussion.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I can&rsquo;t&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She shook her head. &ldquo;Go, please. I do not want to call in Mr. Vyse.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t mean,&rdquo; he said, absolutely ignoring Miss Bartlett&mdash;&ldquo;you
      don&rsquo;t mean that you are going to marry that man?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The line was unexpected.
    </p>
    <p>
      She shrugged her shoulders, as if his vulgarity wearied her. &ldquo;You are
      merely ridiculous,&rdquo; she said quietly.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then his words rose gravely over hers: &ldquo;You cannot live with Vyse. He&rsquo;s
      only for an acquaintance. He is for society and cultivated talk. He should
      know no one intimately, least of all a woman.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It was a new light on Cecil&rsquo;s character.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have you ever talked to Vyse without feeling tired?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can scarcely discuss&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, but have you ever? He is the sort who are all right so long as they
      keep to things&mdash;books, pictures&mdash;but kill when they come to
      people. That&rsquo;s why I&rsquo;ll speak out through all this muddle even now. It&rsquo;s
      shocking enough to lose you in any case, but generally a man must deny
      himself joy, and I would have held back if your Cecil had been a different
      person. I would never have let myself go. But I saw him first in the
      National Gallery, when he winced because my father mispronounced the names
      of great painters. Then he brings us here, and we find it is to play some
      silly trick on a kind neighbour. That is the man all over&mdash;playing
      tricks on people, on the most sacred form of life that he can find. Next,
      I meet you together, and find him protecting and teaching you and your
      mother to be shocked, when it was for YOU to settle whether you were
      shocked or no. Cecil all over again. He daren&rsquo;t let a woman decide. He&rsquo;s
      the type who&rsquo;s kept Europe back for a thousand years. Every moment of his
      life he&rsquo;s forming you, telling you what&rsquo;s charming or amusing or ladylike,
      telling you what a man thinks womanly; and you, you of all women, listen
      to his voice instead of to your own. So it was at the Rectory, when I met
      you both again; so it has been the whole of this afternoon. Therefore&mdash;not
      &lsquo;therefore I kissed you,&rsquo; because the book made me do that, and I wish to
      goodness I had more self-control. I&rsquo;m not ashamed. I don&rsquo;t apologize. But
      it has frightened you, and you may not have noticed that I love you. Or
      would you have told me to go, and dealt with a tremendous thing so
      lightly? But therefore&mdash;therefore I settled to fight him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy thought of a very good remark.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You say Mr. Vyse wants me to listen to him, Mr. Emerson. Pardon me for
      suggesting that you have caught the habit.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And he took the shoddy reproof and touched it into immortality. He said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I have,&rdquo; and sank down as if suddenly weary. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m the same kind of
      brute at bottom. This desire to govern a woman&mdash;it lies very deep,
      and men and women must fight it together before they shall enter the
      garden. But I do love you surely in a better way than he does.&rdquo; He
      thought. &ldquo;Yes&mdash;really in a better way. I want you to have your own
      thoughts even when I hold you in my arms.&rdquo; He stretched them towards her.
      &ldquo;Lucy, be quick&mdash;there&rsquo;s no time for us to talk now&mdash;come to me
      as you came in the spring, and afterwards I will be gentle and explain. I
      have cared for you since that man died. I cannot live without you, &lsquo;No
      good,&rsquo; I thought; &lsquo;she is marrying someone else&rsquo;; but I meet you again
      when all the world is glorious water and sun. As you came through the wood
      I saw that nothing else mattered. I called. I wanted to live and have my
      chance of joy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And Mr. Vyse?&rdquo; said Lucy, who kept commendably calm. &ldquo;Does he not matter?
      That I love Cecil and shall be his wife shortly? A detail of no
      importance, I suppose?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But he stretched his arms over the table towards her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;May I ask what you intend to gain by this exhibition?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He said: &ldquo;It is our last chance. I shall do all that I can.&rdquo; And as if he
      had done all else, he turned to Miss Bartlett, who sat like some portent
      against the skies of the evening. &ldquo;You wouldn&rsquo;t stop us this second time
      if you understood,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I have been into the dark, and I am going
      back into it, unless you will try to understand.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Her long, narrow head drove backwards and forwards, as though demolishing
      some invisible obstacle. She did not answer.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is being young,&rdquo; he said quietly, picking up his racquet from the
      floor and preparing to go. &ldquo;It is being certain that Lucy cares for me
      really. It is that love and youth matter intellectually.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      In silence the two women watched him. His last remark, they knew, was
      nonsense, but was he going after it or not? Would not he, the cad, the
      charlatan, attempt a more dramatic finish? No. He was apparently content.
      He left them, carefully closing the front door; and when they looked
      through the hall window, they saw him go up the drive and begin to climb
      the slopes of withered fern behind the house. Their tongues were loosed,
      and they burst into stealthy rejoicings.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Lucia&mdash;come back here&mdash;oh, what an awful man!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy had no reaction&mdash;at least, not yet. &ldquo;Well, he amuses me,&rdquo; she
      said. &ldquo;Either I&rsquo;m mad, or else he is, and I&rsquo;m inclined to think it&rsquo;s the
      latter. One more fuss through with you, Charlotte. Many thanks. I think,
      though, that this is the last. My admirer will hardly trouble me again.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And Miss Bartlett, too, essayed the roguish:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, it isn&rsquo;t everyone who could boast such a conquest, dearest, is it?
      Oh, one oughtn&rsquo;t to laugh, really. It might have been very serious. But
      you were so sensible and brave&mdash;so unlike the girls of my day.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s go down to them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But, once in the open air, she paused. Some emotion&mdash;pity, terror,
      love, but the emotion was strong&mdash;seized her, and she was aware of
      autumn. Summer was ending, and the evening brought her odours of decay,
      the more pathetic because they were reminiscent of spring. That something
      or other mattered intellectually? A leaf, violently agitated, danced past
      her, while other leaves lay motionless. That the earth was hastening to
      re-enter darkness, and the shadows of those trees over Windy Corner?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hullo, Lucy! There&rsquo;s still light enough for another set, if you two&rsquo;ll
      hurry.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Emerson has had to go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What a nuisance! That spoils the four. I say, Cecil, do play, do, there&rsquo;s
      a good chap. It&rsquo;s Floyd&rsquo;s last day. Do play tennis with us, just this
      once.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil&rsquo;s voice came: &ldquo;My dear Freddy, I am no athlete. As you well remarked
      this very morning, &lsquo;There are some chaps who are no good for anything but
      books&rsquo;; I plead guilty to being such a chap, and will not inflict myself
      on you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The scales fell from Lucy&rsquo;s eyes. How had she stood Cecil for a moment? He
      was absolutely intolerable, and the same evening she broke off her
      engagement.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0018" id="link2HCH0018">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter XVII: Lying to Cecil
    </h2>
    <p>
      He was bewildered. He had nothing to say. He was not even angry, but
      stood, with a glass of whiskey between his hands, trying to think what had
      led her to such a conclusion.
    </p>
    <p>
      She had chosen the moment before bed, when, in accordance with their
      bourgeois habit, she always dispensed drinks to the men. Freddy and Mr.
      Floyd were sure to retire with their glasses, while Cecil invariably
      lingered, sipping at his while she locked up the sideboard.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am very sorry about it,&rdquo; she said; &ldquo;I have carefully thought things
      over. We are too different. I must ask you to release me, and try to
      forget that there ever was such a foolish girl.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It was a suitable speech, but she was more angry than sorry, and her voice
      showed it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Different&mdash;how&mdash;how&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I haven&rsquo;t had a really good education, for one thing,&rdquo; she continued,
      still on her knees by the sideboard. &ldquo;My Italian trip came too late, and I
      am forgetting all that I learnt there. I shall never be able to talk to
      your friends, or behave as a wife of yours should.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t understand you. You aren&rsquo;t like yourself. You&rsquo;re tired, Lucy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Tired!&rdquo; she retorted, kindling at once. &ldquo;That is exactly like you. You
      always think women don&rsquo;t mean what they say.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, you sound tired, as if something has worried you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What if I do? It doesn&rsquo;t prevent me from realizing the truth. I can&rsquo;t
      marry you, and you will thank me for saying so some day.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You had that bad headache yesterday&mdash;All right&rdquo;&mdash;for she had
      exclaimed indignantly: &ldquo;I see it&rsquo;s much more than headaches. But give me a
      moment&rsquo;s time.&rdquo; He closed his eyes. &ldquo;You must excuse me if I say stupid
      things, but my brain has gone to pieces. Part of it lives three minutes
      back, when I was sure that you loved me, and the other part&mdash;I find
      it difficult&mdash;I am likely to say the wrong thing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It struck her that he was not behaving so badly, and her irritation
      increased. She again desired a struggle, not a discussion. To bring on the
      crisis, she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There are days when one sees clearly, and this is one of them. Things
      must come to a breaking-point some time, and it happens to be to-day. If
      you want to know, quite a little thing decided me to speak to you&mdash;when
      you wouldn&rsquo;t play tennis with Freddy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I never do play tennis,&rdquo; said Cecil, painfully bewildered; &ldquo;I never could
      play. I don&rsquo;t understand a word you say.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You can play well enough to make up a four. I thought it abominably
      selfish of you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I can&rsquo;t&mdash;well, never mind the tennis. Why couldn&rsquo;t you&mdash;couldn&rsquo;t
      you have warned me if you felt anything wrong? You talked of our wedding
      at lunch&mdash;at least, you let me talk.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I knew you wouldn&rsquo;t understand,&rdquo; said Lucy quite crossly. &ldquo;I might have
      known there would have been these dreadful explanations. Of course, it
      isn&rsquo;t the tennis&mdash;that was only the last straw to all I have been
      feeling for weeks. Surely it was better not to speak until I felt
      certain.&rdquo; She developed this position. &ldquo;Often before I have wondered if I
      was fitted for your wife&mdash;for instance, in London; and are you fitted
      to be my husband? I don&rsquo;t think so. You don&rsquo;t like Freddy, nor my mother.
      There was always a lot against our engagement, Cecil, but all our
      relations seemed pleased, and we met so often, and it was no good
      mentioning it until&mdash;well, until all things came to a point. They
      have to-day. I see clearly. I must speak. That&rsquo;s all.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I cannot think you were right,&rdquo; said Cecil gently. &ldquo;I cannot tell why,
      but though all that you say sounds true, I feel that you are not treating
      me fairly. It&rsquo;s all too horrible.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&rsquo;s the good of a scene?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No good. But surely I have a right to hear a little more.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He put down his glass and opened the window. From where she knelt,
      jangling her keys, she could see a slit of darkness, and, peering into it,
      as if it would tell him that &ldquo;little more,&rdquo; his long, thoughtful face.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t open the window; and you&rsquo;d better draw the curtain, too; Freddy or
      any one might be outside.&rdquo; He obeyed. &ldquo;I really think we had better go to
      bed, if you don&rsquo;t mind. I shall only say things that will make me unhappy
      afterwards. As you say it is all too horrible, and it is no good talking.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But to Cecil, now that he was about to lose her, she seemed each moment
      more desirable. He looked at her, instead of through her, for the first
      time since they were engaged. From a Leonardo she had become a living
      woman, with mysteries and forces of her own, with qualities that even
      eluded art. His brain recovered from the shock, and, in a burst of genuine
      devotion, he cried: &ldquo;But I love you, and I did think you loved me!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I did not,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;I thought I did at first. I am sorry, and ought to
      have refused you this last time, too.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He began to walk up and down the room, and she grew more and more vexed at
      his dignified behaviour. She had counted on his being petty. It would have
      made things easier for her. By a cruel irony she was drawing out all that
      was finest in his disposition.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t love me, evidently. I dare say you are right not to. But it
      would hurt a little less if I knew why.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because&rdquo;&mdash;a phrase came to her, and she accepted it&mdash;&ldquo;you&rsquo;re
      the sort who can&rsquo;t know any one intimately.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A horrified look came into his eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t mean exactly that. But you will question me, though I beg you not
      to, and I must say something. It is that, more or less. When we were only
      acquaintances, you let me be myself, but now you&rsquo;re always protecting me.&rdquo;
       Her voice swelled. &ldquo;I won&rsquo;t be protected. I will choose for myself what is
      ladylike and right. To shield me is an insult. Can&rsquo;t I be trusted to face
      the truth but I must get it second-hand through you? A woman&rsquo;s place! You
      despise my mother&mdash;I know you do&mdash;because she&rsquo;s conventional and
      bothers over puddings; but, oh goodness!&rdquo;&mdash;she rose to her feet&mdash;&ldquo;conventional,
      Cecil, you&rsquo;re that, for you may understand beautiful things, but you don&rsquo;t
      know how to use them; and you wrap yourself up in art and books and music,
      and would try to wrap up me. I won&rsquo;t be stifled, not by the most glorious
      music, for people are more glorious, and you hide them from me. That&rsquo;s why
      I break off my engagement. You were all right as long as you kept to
      things, but when you came to people&mdash;&rdquo; She stopped.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a pause. Then Cecil said with great emotion:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is true.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;True on the whole,&rdquo; she corrected, full of some vague shame.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;True, every word. It is a revelation. It is&mdash;I.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Anyhow, those are my reasons for not being your wife.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He repeated: &ldquo;&lsquo;The sort that can know no one intimately.&rsquo; It is true. I
      fell to pieces the very first day we were engaged. I behaved like a cad to
      Beebe and to your brother. You are even greater than I thought.&rdquo; She
      withdrew a step. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not going to worry you. You are far too good to me.
      I shall never forget your insight; and, dear, I only blame you for this:
      you might have warned me in the early stages, before you felt you wouldn&rsquo;t
      marry me, and so have given me a chance to improve. I have never known you
      till this evening. I have just used you as a peg for my silly notions of
      what a woman should be. But this evening you are a different person: new
      thoughts&mdash;even a new voice&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you mean by a new voice?&rdquo; she asked, seized with incontrollable
      anger.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I mean that a new person seems speaking through you,&rdquo; said he.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then she lost her balance. She cried: &ldquo;If you think I am in love with some
      one else, you are very much mistaken.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course I don&rsquo;t think that. You are not that kind, Lucy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, yes, you do think it. It&rsquo;s your old idea, the idea that has kept
      Europe back&mdash;I mean the idea that women are always thinking of men.
      If a girl breaks off her engagement, everyone says: &lsquo;Oh, she had someone
      else in her mind; she hopes to get someone else.&rsquo; It&rsquo;s disgusting,
      brutal! As if a girl can&rsquo;t break it off for the sake of freedom.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He answered reverently: &ldquo;I may have said that in the past. I shall never
      say it again. You have taught me better.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She began to redden, and pretended to examine the windows again.
</p>
    <p>
&ldquo;Of
      course, there is no question of &lsquo;someone else&rsquo; in this, no &lsquo;jilting&rsquo; or
      any such nauseous stupidity. I beg your pardon most humbly if my words
      suggested that there was. I only meant that there was a force in you that
      I hadn&rsquo;t known of up till now.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right, Cecil, that will do. Don&rsquo;t apologize to me. It was my
      mistake.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is a question between ideals, yours and mine&mdash;pure abstract
      ideals, and yours are the nobler. I was bound up in the old vicious
      notions, and all the time you were splendid and new.&rdquo; His voice broke. &ldquo;I
      must actually thank you for what you have done&mdash;for showing me what I
      really am. Solemnly, I thank you for showing me a true woman. Will you
      shake hands?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course I will,&rdquo; said Lucy, twisting up her other hand in the curtains.
      &ldquo;Good-night, Cecil. Good-bye. That&rsquo;s all right. I&rsquo;m sorry about it. Thank
      you very much for your gentleness.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let me light your candle, shall I?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They went into the hall.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Thank you. Good-night again. God bless you, Lucy!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good-bye, Cecil.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She watched him steal up-stairs, while the shadows from three banisters
      passed over her face like the beat of wings. On the landing he paused
      strong in his renunciation, and gave her a look of memorable beauty. For
      all his culture, Cecil was an ascetic at heart, and nothing in his love
      became him like the leaving of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      She could never marry. In the tumult of her soul, that stood firm. Cecil
      believed in her; she must some day believe in herself. She must be one of
      the women whom she had praised so eloquently, who care for liberty and not
      for men; she must forget that George loved her, that George had been
      thinking through her and gained her this honourable release, that George
      had gone away into&mdash;what was it?&mdash;the darkness.
    </p>
    <p>
      She put out the lamp.
    </p>
    <p>
      It did not do to think, nor, for the matter of that, to feel. She gave up
      trying to understand herself, and joined the vast armies of the benighted, who
      follow neither the heart nor the brain, and march to their destiny by
      catch-words. The armies are full of pleasant and pious folk. But they have
      yielded to the only enemy that matters&mdash;the enemy within. They have
      sinned against passion and truth, and vain will be their strife after
      virtue. As the years pass, they are censured. Their pleasantry and their
      piety show cracks, their wit becomes cynicism, their unselfishness
      hypocrisy; they feel and produce discomfort wherever they go. They have
      sinned against Eros and against Pallas Athene, and not by any heavenly
      intervention, but by the ordinary course of nature, those allied deities
      will be avenged.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy entered this army when she pretended to George that she did not love
      him, and pretended to Cecil that she loved no one. The night received her,
      as it had received Miss Bartlett thirty years before.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0019" id="link2HCH0019">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter XVIII: Lying to Mr. Beebe, Mrs. Honeychurch, Freddy, and The
      Servants
    </h2>
    <p>
      Windy Corner lay, not on the summit of the ridge, but a few hundred feet
      down the southern slope, at the springing of one of the great buttresses
      that supported the hill. On either side of it was a shallow ravine, filled
      with ferns and pine-trees, and down the ravine on the left ran the highway
      into the Weald.
    </p>
    <p>
      Whenever Mr. Beebe crossed the ridge and caught sight of these noble
      dispositions of the earth, and, poised in the middle of them, Windy
      Corner,&mdash;he laughed. The situation was so glorious, the house so
      commonplace, not to say impertinent. The late Mr. Honeychurch had affected
      the cube, because it gave him the most accommodation for his money, and
      the only addition made by his widow had been a small turret, shaped like a
      rhinoceros&rsquo; horn, where she could sit in wet weather and watch the carts
      going up and down the road. So impertinent&mdash;and yet the house &ldquo;did,&rdquo;
       for it was the home of people who loved their surroundings honestly. Other
      houses in the neighborhood had been built by expensive architects, over
      others their inmates had fidgeted sedulously, yet all these suggested the
      accidental, the temporary; while Windy Corner seemed as inevitable as an
      ugliness of Nature&rsquo;s own creation. One might laugh at the house, but one
      never shuddered. Mr. Beebe was bicycling over this Monday afternoon with a
      piece of gossip. He had heard from the Miss Alans. These admirable ladies,
      since they could not go to Cissie Villa, had changed their plans. They
      were going to Greece instead.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Since Florence did my poor sister so much good,&rdquo; wrote Miss Catharine,
      &ldquo;we do not see why we should not try Athens this winter. Of course, Athens
      is a plunge, and the doctor has ordered her special digestive bread; but,
      after all, we can take that with us, and it is only getting first into a
      steamer and then into a train. But is there an English Church?&rdquo; And the
      letter went on to say: &ldquo;I do not expect we shall go any further than
      Athens, but if you knew of a really comfortable pension at Constantinople,
      we should be so grateful.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy would enjoy this letter, and the smile with which Mr. Beebe greeted
      Windy Corner was partly for her. She would see the fun of it, and some of
      its beauty, for she must see some beauty. Though she was hopeless about
      pictures, and though she dressed so unevenly&mdash;oh, that cerise frock
      yesterday at church!&mdash;she must see some beauty in life, or she could
      not play the piano as she did. He had a theory that musicians are
      incredibly complex, and know far less than other artists what they want
      and what they are; that they puzzle themselves as well as their friends;
      that their psychology is a modern development, and has not yet been
      understood. This theory, had he known it, had possibly just been
      illustrated by facts. Ignorant of the events of yesterday he was only
      riding over to get some tea, to see his niece, and to observe whether Miss
      Honeychurch saw anything beautiful in the desire of two old ladies to
      visit Athens.
    </p>
    <p>
      A carriage was drawn up outside Windy Corner, and just as he caught sight
      of the house it started, bowled up the drive, and stopped abruptly when it
      reached the main road. Therefore it must be the horse, who always expected
      people to walk up the hill in case they tired him. The door opened
      obediently, and two men emerged, whom Mr. Beebe recognized as Cecil and
      Freddy. They were an odd couple to go driving; but he saw a trunk beside
      the coachman&rsquo;s legs. Cecil, who wore a bowler, must be going away, while
      Freddy (a cap)&mdash;was seeing him to the station. They walked rapidly,
      taking the short cuts, and reached the summit while the carriage was still
      pursuing the windings of the road.
    </p>
    <p>
      They shook hands with the clergyman, but did not speak.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So you&rsquo;re off for a minute, Mr. Vyse?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil said, &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; while Freddy edged away.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I was coming to show you this delightful letter from those friends of
      Miss Honeychurch.&rdquo; He quoted from it. &ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t it wonderful? Isn&rsquo;t it
      romance? Most certainly they will go to Constantinople. They are taken in
      a snare that cannot fail. They will end by going round the world.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil listened civilly, and said he was sure that Lucy would be amused and
      interested.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t Romance capricious! I never notice it in you young people; you do
      nothing but play lawn tennis, and say that romance is dead, while the Miss
      Alans are struggling with all the weapons of propriety against the
      terrible thing. &lsquo;A really comfortable pension at Constantinople!&rsquo; So they
      call it out of decency, but in their hearts they want a pension with magic
      windows opening on the foam of perilous seas in fairyland forlorn! No
      ordinary view will content the Miss Alans. They want the Pension Keats.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m awfully sorry to interrupt, Mr. Beebe,&rdquo; said Freddy, &ldquo;but have you
      any matches?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have,&rdquo; said Cecil, and it did not escape Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s notice that he
      spoke to the boy more kindly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have never met these Miss Alans, have you, Mr. Vyse?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Never.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then you don&rsquo;t see the wonder of this Greek visit. I haven&rsquo;t been to
      Greece myself, and don&rsquo;t mean to go, and I can&rsquo;t imagine any of my friends
      going. It is altogether too big for our little lot. Don&rsquo;t you think so?
      Italy is just about as much as we can manage. Italy is heroic, but Greece
      is godlike or devilish&mdash;I am not sure which, and in either case
      absolutely out of our suburban focus. All right, Freddy&mdash;I am not
      being clever, upon my word I am not&mdash;I took the idea from another
      fellow; and give me those matches when you&rsquo;ve done with them.&rdquo; He lit a
      cigarette, and went on talking to the two young men. &ldquo;I was saying, if our
      poor little Cockney lives must have a background, let it be Italian. Big
      enough in all conscience. The ceiling of the Sistine Chapel for me. There
      the contrast is just as much as I can realize. But not the Parthenon, not
      the frieze of Phidias at any price; and here comes the victoria.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re quite right,&rdquo; said Cecil. &ldquo;Greece is not for our little lot&rdquo;; and
      he got in. Freddy followed, nodding to the clergyman, whom he trusted not
      to be pulling one&rsquo;s leg, really. And before they had gone a dozen yards he
      jumped out, and came running back for Vyse&rsquo;s match-box, which had not been
      returned. As he took it, he said: &ldquo;I&rsquo;m so glad you only talked about
      books. Cecil&rsquo;s hard hit. Lucy won&rsquo;t marry him. If you&rsquo;d gone on about her,
      as you did about them, he might have broken down.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But when&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Late last night. I must go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps they won&rsquo;t want me down there.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;go on. Good-bye.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Thank goodness!&rdquo; exclaimed Mr. Beebe to himself, and struck the saddle of
      his bicycle approvingly, &ldquo;It was the one foolish thing she ever did. Oh,
      what a glorious riddance!&rdquo; And, after a little thought, he negotiated the
      slope into Windy Corner, light of heart. The house was again as it ought
      to be&mdash;cut off forever from Cecil&rsquo;s pretentious world.
    </p>
    <p>
      He would find Miss Minnie down in the garden.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the drawing-room Lucy was tinkling at a Mozart Sonata. He hesitated a
      moment, but went down the garden as requested. There he found a mournful
      company. It was a blustering day, and the wind had taken and broken the
      dahlias. Mrs. Honeychurch, who looked cross, was tying them up, while Miss
      Bartlett, unsuitably dressed, impeded her with offers of assistance. At a
      little distance stood Minnie and the &ldquo;garden-child,&rdquo; a minute importation,
      each holding either end of a long piece of bass.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, how do you do, Mr. Beebe? Gracious what a mess everything is! Look at
      my scarlet pompoms, and the wind blowing your skirts about, and the ground
      so hard that not a prop will stick in, and then the carriage having to go
      out, when I had counted on having Powell, who&mdash;give everyone their
      due&mdash;does tie up dahlias properly.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Evidently Mrs. Honeychurch was shattered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you do?&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, with a meaning glance, as though
      conveying that more than dahlias had been broken off by the autumn gales.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Here, Lennie, the bass,&rdquo; cried Mrs. Honeychurch. The garden-child, who
      did not know what bass was, stood rooted to the path with horror. Minnie
      slipped to her uncle and whispered that everyone was very disagreeable
      to-day, and that it was not her fault if dahlia-strings would tear
      longways instead of across.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come for a walk with me,&rdquo; he told her. &ldquo;You have worried them as much as
      they can stand. Mrs. Honeychurch, I only called in aimlessly. I shall take
      her up to tea at the Beehive Tavern, if I may.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, must you? Yes do.&mdash;Not the scissors, thank you, Charlotte, when
      both my hands are full already&mdash;I&rsquo;m perfectly certain that the orange
      cactus will go before I can get to it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe, who was an adept at relieving situations, invited Miss Bartlett
      to accompany them to this mild festivity.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, Charlotte, I don&rsquo;t want you&mdash;do go; there&rsquo;s nothing to stop
      about for, either in the house or out of it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett said that her duty lay in the dahlia bed, but when she had
      exasperated everyone, except Minnie, by a refusal, she turned round and
      exasperated Minnie by an acceptance. As they walked up the garden, the
      orange cactus fell, and Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s last vision was of the garden-child
      clasping it like a lover, his dark head buried in a wealth of blossom.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is terrible, this havoc among the flowers,&rdquo; he remarked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is always terrible when the promise of months is destroyed in a
      moment,&rdquo; enunciated Miss Bartlett.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps we ought to send Miss Honeychurch down to her mother. Or will she
      come with us?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think we had better leave Lucy to herself, and to her own pursuits.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They&rsquo;re angry with Miss Honeychurch because she was late for breakfast,&rdquo;
       whispered Minnie, &ldquo;and Floyd has gone, and Mr. Vyse has gone, and Freddy
      won&rsquo;t play with me. In fact, Uncle Arthur, the house is not AT ALL what it
      was yesterday.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t be a prig,&rdquo; said her Uncle Arthur. &ldquo;Go and put on your boots.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He stepped into the drawing-room, where Lucy was still attentively
      pursuing the Sonatas of Mozart. She stopped when he entered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you do? Miss Bartlett and Minnie are coming with me to tea at the
      Beehive. Would you come too?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think I will, thank you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I didn&rsquo;t suppose you would care to much.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy turned to the piano and struck a few chords.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How delicate those Sonatas are!&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe, though at the bottom of
      his heart, he thought them silly little things.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy passed into Schumann.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Honeychurch!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I met them on the hill. Your brother told me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh he did?&rdquo; She sounded annoyed. Mr. Beebe felt hurt, for he had thought
      that she would like him to be told.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I needn&rsquo;t say that it will go no further.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mother, Charlotte, Cecil, Freddy, you,&rdquo; said Lucy, playing a note for
      each person who knew, and then playing a sixth note.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you&rsquo;ll let me say so, I am very glad, and I am certain that you have
      done the right thing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So I hoped other people would think, but they don&rsquo;t seem to.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I could see that Miss Bartlett thought it unwise.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So does mother. Mother minds dreadfully.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am very sorry for that,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe with feeling.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Honeychurch, who hated all changes, did mind, but not nearly as much
      as her daughter pretended, and only for the minute. It was really a ruse
      of Lucy&rsquo;s to justify her despondency&mdash;a ruse of which she was not
      herself conscious, for she was marching in the armies of darkness.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And Freddy minds.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Still, Freddy never hit it off with Vyse much, did he? I gathered that he
      disliked the engagement, and felt it might separate him from you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Boys are so odd.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Minnie could be heard arguing with Miss Bartlett through the floor. Tea at
      the Beehive apparently involved a complete change of apparel. Mr. Beebe
      saw that Lucy&mdash;very properly&mdash;did not wish to discuss her
      action, so after a sincere expression of sympathy, he said, &ldquo;I have had an
      absurd letter from Miss Alan. That was really what brought me over. I
      thought it might amuse you all.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How delightful!&rdquo; said Lucy, in a dull voice.
    </p>
    <p>
      For the sake of something to do, he began to read her the letter. After a
      few words her eyes grew alert, and soon she interrupted him with &ldquo;Going
      abroad? When do they start?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Next week, I gather.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Did Freddy say whether he was driving straight back?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, he didn&rsquo;t.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because I do hope he won&rsquo;t go gossiping.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      So she did want to talk about her broken engagement. Always complaisant,
      he put the letter away. But she, at once exclaimed in a high voice, &ldquo;Oh,
      do tell me more about the Miss Alans! How perfectly splendid of them to go
      abroad!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want them to start from Venice, and go in a cargo steamer down the
      Illyrian coast!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She laughed heartily. &ldquo;Oh, delightful! I wish they&rsquo;d take me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Has Italy filled you with the fever of travel? Perhaps George Emerson is
      right. He says that &lsquo;Italy is only an euphuism for Fate.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, not Italy, but Constantinople. I have always longed to go to
      Constantinople. Constantinople is practically Asia, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe reminded her that Constantinople was still unlikely, and that
      the Miss Alans only aimed at Athens, &ldquo;with Delphi, perhaps, if the roads
      are safe.&rdquo; But this made no difference to her enthusiasm. She had always
      longed to go to Greece even more, it seemed. He saw, to his surprise, that
      she was apparently serious.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t realize that you and the Miss Alans were still such friends,
      after Cissie Villa.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, that&rsquo;s nothing; I assure you Cissie Villa&rsquo;s nothing to me; I would
      give anything to go with them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Would your mother spare you again so soon? You have scarcely been home
      three months.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She MUST spare me!&rdquo; cried Lucy, in growing excitement. &ldquo;I simply MUST go
      away. I have to.&rdquo; She ran her fingers hysterically through her hair.
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you see that I HAVE to go away? I didn&rsquo;t realize at the time&mdash;and
      of course I want to see Constantinople so particularly.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You mean that since you have broken off your engagement you feel&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, yes. I knew you&rsquo;d understand.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe did not quite understand. Why could not Miss Honeychurch repose
      in the bosom of her family? Cecil had evidently taken up the dignified
      line, and was not going to annoy her. Then it struck him that her family
      itself might be annoying. He hinted this to her, and she accepted the hint
      eagerly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, of course; to go to Constantinople until they are used to the idea
      and everything has calmed down.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am afraid it has been a bothersome business,&rdquo; he said gently.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, not at all. Cecil was very kind indeed; only&mdash;I had better tell
      you the whole truth, since you have heard a little&mdash;it was that he is
      so masterful. I found that he wouldn&rsquo;t let me go my own way. He would
      improve me in places where I can&rsquo;t be improved. Cecil won&rsquo;t let a woman
      decide for herself&mdash;in fact, he daren&rsquo;t. What nonsense I do talk! But
      that is the kind of thing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is what I gathered from my own observation of Mr. Vyse; it is what I
      gather from all that I have known of you. I do sympathize and agree most
      profoundly. I agree so much that you must let me make one little
      criticism: Is it worth while rushing off to Greece?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I must go somewhere!&rdquo; she cried. &ldquo;I have been worrying all the
      morning, and here comes the very thing.&rdquo; She struck her knees with
      clenched fists, and repeated: &ldquo;I must! And the time I shall have with
      mother, and all the money she spent on me last spring. You all think much
      too highly of me. I wish you weren&rsquo;t so kind.&rdquo; At this moment Miss
      Bartlett entered, and her nervousness increased. &ldquo;I must get away, ever so
      far. I must know my own mind and where I want to go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come along; tea, tea, tea,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe, and bustled his guests out of
      the front-door. He hustled them so quickly that he forgot his hat. When he
      returned for it he heard, to his relief and surprise, the tinkling of a
      Mozart Sonata.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She is playing again,&rdquo; he said to Miss Bartlett.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy can always play,&rdquo; was the acid reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;One is very thankful that she has such a resource. She is evidently much
      worried, as, of course, she ought to be. I know all about it. The marriage
      was so near that it must have been a hard struggle before she could wind
      herself up to speak.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett gave a kind of wriggle, and he prepared for a discussion. He
      had never fathomed Miss Bartlett. As he had put it to himself at Florence,
      &ldquo;she might yet reveal depths of strangeness, if not of meaning.&rdquo; But she
      was so unsympathetic that she must be reliable. He assumed that much, and
      he had no hesitation in discussing Lucy with her. Minnie was fortunately
      collecting ferns.
    </p>
    <p>
      She opened the discussion with: &ldquo;We had much better let the matter drop.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I wonder.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is of the highest importance that there should be no gossip in Summer
      Street. It would be DEATH to gossip about Mr. Vyse&rsquo;s dismissal at the
      present moment.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe raised his eyebrows. Death is a strong word&mdash;surely too
      strong. There was no question of tragedy. He said: &ldquo;Of course, Miss
      Honeychurch will make the fact public in her own way, and when she
      chooses. Freddy only told me because he knew she would not mind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett civilly. &ldquo;Yet Freddy ought not to have told
      even you. One cannot be too careful.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Quite so.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I do implore absolute secrecy. A chance word to a chattering friend, and&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Exactly.&rdquo; He was used to these nervous old maids and to the exaggerated
      importance that they attach to words. A rector lives in a web of petty
      secrets, and confidences and warnings, and the wiser he is the less he
      will regard them. He will change the subject, as did Mr. Beebe, saying
      cheerfully: &ldquo;Have you heard from any Bertolini people lately? I believe
      you keep up with Miss Lavish. It is odd how we of that pension, who seemed
      such a fortuitous collection, have been working into one another&rsquo;s lives.
      Two, three, four, six of us&mdash;no, eight; I had forgotten the Emersons&mdash;have
      kept more or less in touch. We must really give the Signora a
      testimonial.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And, Miss Bartlett not favouring the scheme, they walked up the hill in a
      silence which was only broken by the rector naming some fern. On the
      summit they paused. The sky had grown wilder since he stood there last
      hour, giving to the land a tragic greatness that is rare in Surrey. Grey
      clouds were charging across tissues of white, which stretched and shredded
      and tore slowly, until through their final layers there gleamed a hint of
      the disappearing blue. Summer was retreating. The wind roared, the trees
      groaned, yet the noise seemed insufficient for those vast operations in
      heaven. The weather was breaking up, breaking, broken, and it is a sense
      of the fit rather than of the supernatural that equips such crises with
      the salvos of angelic artillery. Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s eyes rested on Windy Corner,
      where Lucy sat, practising Mozart. No smile came to his lips, and,
      changing the subject again, he said: &ldquo;We shan&rsquo;t have rain, but we shall
      have darkness, so let us hurry on. The darkness last night was appalling.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They reached the Beehive Tavern at about five o&rsquo;clock. That amiable
      hostelry possesses a verandah, in which the young and the unwise do dearly
      love to sit, while guests of more mature years seek a pleasant sanded
      room, and have tea at a table comfortably. Mr. Beebe saw that Miss
      Bartlett would be cold if she sat out, and that Minnie would be dull if
      she sat in, so he proposed a division of forces. They would hand the child
      her food through the window. Thus he was incidentally enabled to discuss
      the fortunes of Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have been thinking, Miss Bartlett,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;and, unless you very much
      object, I would like to reopen that discussion.&rdquo; She bowed. &ldquo;Nothing about
      the past. I know little and care less about that; I am absolutely certain
      that it is to your cousin&rsquo;s credit. She has acted loftily and rightly, and
      it is like her gentle modesty to say that we think too highly of her. But
      the future. Seriously, what do you think of this Greek plan?&rdquo; He pulled
      out the letter again. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know whether you overheard, but she wants
      to join the Miss Alans in their mad career. It&rsquo;s all&mdash;I can&rsquo;t explain&mdash;it&rsquo;s
      wrong.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett read the letter in silence, laid it down, seemed to
      hesitate, and then read it again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t see the point of it myself.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      To his astonishment, she replied: &ldquo;There I cannot agree with you. In it I
      spy Lucy&rsquo;s salvation.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Really. Now, why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She wanted to leave Windy Corner.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know&mdash;but it seems so odd, so unlike her, so&mdash;I was going to
      say&mdash;selfish.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is natural, surely&mdash;after such painful scenes&mdash;that she
      should desire a change.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Here, apparently, was one of those points that the male intellect misses.
      Mr. Beebe exclaimed: &ldquo;So she says herself, and since another lady agrees
      with her, I must own that I am partially convinced. Perhaps she must have
      a change. I have no sisters or&mdash;and I don&rsquo;t understand these things.
      But why need she go as far as Greece?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You may well ask that,&rdquo; replied Miss Bartlett, who was evidently
      interested, and had almost dropped her evasive manner. &ldquo;Why Greece? (What
      is it, Minnie dear&mdash;jam?) Why not Tunbridge Wells? Oh, Mr. Beebe! I
      had a long and most unsatisfactory interview with dear Lucy this morning.
      I cannot help her. I will say no more. Perhaps I have already said too
      much. I am not to talk. I wanted her to spend six months with me at
      Tunbridge Wells, and she refused.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe poked at a crumb with his knife.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But my feelings are of no importance. I know too well that I get on
      Lucy&rsquo;s nerves. Our tour was a failure. She wanted to leave Florence, and
      when we got to Rome she did not want to be in Rome, and all the time I
      felt that I was spending her mother&rsquo;s money&mdash;.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let us keep to the future, though,&rdquo; interrupted Mr. Beebe. &ldquo;I want your
      advice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well,&rdquo; said Charlotte, with a choky abruptness that was new to him,
      though familiar to Lucy. &ldquo;I for one will help her to go to Greece. Will
      you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe considered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is absolutely necessary,&rdquo; she continued, lowering her veil and
      whispering through it with a passion, an intensity, that surprised him. &ldquo;I
      know&mdash;I know.&rdquo; The darkness was coming on, and he felt that this odd
      woman really did know. &ldquo;She must not stop here a moment, and we must keep
      quiet till she goes. I trust that the servants know nothing. Afterwards&mdash;but
      I may have said too much already. Only, Lucy and I are helpless against
      Mrs. Honeychurch alone. If you help we may succeed. Otherwise&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Otherwise&mdash;?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Otherwise,&rdquo; she repeated as if the word held finality.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I will help her,&rdquo; said the clergyman, setting his jaw firm. &ldquo;Come,
      let us go back now, and settle the whole thing up.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett burst into florid gratitude. The tavern sign&mdash;a beehive
      trimmed evenly with bees&mdash;creaked in the wind outside as she thanked
      him. Mr. Beebe did not quite understand the situation; but then, he did
      not desire to understand it, nor to jump to the conclusion of &ldquo;another
      man&rdquo; that would have attracted a grosser mind. He only felt that Miss
      Bartlett knew of some vague influence from which the girl desired to be
      delivered, and which might well be clothed in the fleshly form. Its very
      vagueness spurred him into knight-errantry. His belief in celibacy, so
      reticent, so carefully concealed beneath his tolerance and culture, now
      came to the surface and expanded like some delicate flower. &ldquo;They that
      marry do well, but they that refrain do better.&rdquo; So ran his belief, and he
      never heard that an engagement was broken off but with a slight feeling of
      pleasure. In the case of Lucy, the feeling was intensified through dislike
      of Cecil; and he was willing to go further&mdash;to place her out of
      danger until she could confirm her resolution of virginity. The feeling
      was very subtle and quite undogmatic, and he never imparted it to any
      other of the characters in this entanglement. Yet it existed, and it alone
      explains his action subsequently, and his influence on the action of
      others. The compact that he made with Miss Bartlett in the tavern, was to
      help not only Lucy, but religion also.
    </p>
    <p>
      They hurried home through a world of black and grey. He conversed on
      indifferent topics: the Emersons&rsquo; need of a housekeeper; servants; Italian
      servants; novels about Italy; novels with a purpose; could literature
      influence life? Windy Corner glimmered. In the garden, Mrs. Honeychurch,
      now helped by Freddy, still wrestled with the lives of her flowers.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It gets too dark,&rdquo; she said hopelessly. &ldquo;This comes of putting off. We
      might have known the weather would break up soon; and now Lucy wants to go
      to Greece. I don&rsquo;t know what the world&rsquo;s coming to.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mrs. Honeychurch,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;go to Greece she must. Come up to the house
      and let&rsquo;s talk it over. Do you, in the first place, mind her breaking with
      Vyse?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Beebe, I&rsquo;m thankful&mdash;simply thankful.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So am I,&rdquo; said Freddy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good. Now come up to the house.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They conferred in the dining-room for half an hour.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy would never have carried the Greek scheme alone. It was expensive and
      dramatic&mdash;both qualities that her mother loathed. Nor would Charlotte
      have succeeded. The honours of the day rested with Mr. Beebe. By his tact
      and common sense, and by his influence as a clergyman&mdash;for a
      clergyman who was not a fool influenced Mrs. Honeychurch greatly&mdash;he
      bent her to their purpose, &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t see why Greece is necessary,&rdquo; she
      said; &ldquo;but as you do, I suppose it is all right. It must be something I
      can&rsquo;t understand. Lucy! Let&rsquo;s tell her. Lucy!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She is playing the piano,&rdquo; Mr. Beebe said. He opened the door, and heard
      the words of a song:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     &ldquo;Look not thou on beauty&rsquo;s charming.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t know that Miss Honeychurch sang, too.&rdquo;
     </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  &ldquo;Sit thou still when kings are arming,
   Taste not when the wine-cup glistens&mdash;&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a song that Cecil gave her. How odd girls are!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&rsquo;s that?&rdquo; called Lucy, stopping short.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right, dear,&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch kindly. She went into the
      drawing-room, and Mr. Beebe heard her kiss Lucy and say: &ldquo;I am sorry I was
      so cross about Greece, but it came on the top of the dahlias.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Rather a hard voice said: &ldquo;Thank you, mother; that doesn&rsquo;t matter a bit.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you are right, too&mdash;Greece will be all right; you can go if the
      Miss Alans will have you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, splendid! Oh, thank you!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe followed. Lucy still sat at the piano with her hands over the
      keys. She was glad, but he had expected greater gladness. Her mother bent
      over her. Freddy, to whom she had been singing, reclined on the floor with
      his head against her, and an unlit pipe between his lips. Oddly enough,
      the group was beautiful. Mr. Beebe, who loved the art of the past, was
      reminded of a favourite theme, the Santa Conversazione, in which people
      who care for one another are painted chatting together about noble things&mdash;a
      theme neither sensual nor sensational, and therefore ignored by the art of
      to-day. Why should Lucy want either to marry or to travel when she had
      such friends at home?
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  &ldquo;Taste not when the wine-cup glistens,
   Speak not when the people listens,&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      she continued.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Here&rsquo;s Mr. Beebe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Beebe knows my rude ways.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a beautiful song and a wise one,&rdquo; said he. &ldquo;Go on.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It isn&rsquo;t very good,&rdquo; she said listlessly. &ldquo;I forget why&mdash;harmony or
      something.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suspected it was unscholarly. It&rsquo;s so beautiful.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The tune&rsquo;s right enough,&rdquo; said Freddy, &ldquo;but the words are rotten. Why
      throw up the sponge?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How stupidly you talk!&rdquo; said his sister. The Santa Conversazione was
      broken up. After all, there was no reason that Lucy should talk about
      Greece or thank him for persuading her mother, so he said good-bye.
    </p>
    <p>
      Freddy lit his bicycle lamp for him in the porch, and with his usual
      felicity of phrase, said: &ldquo;This has been a day and a half.&rdquo;
     </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
    &ldquo;Stop thine ear against the singer&mdash;&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wait a minute; she is finishing.&rdquo;
     </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;From the red gold keep thy finger;
    Vacant heart and hand and eye
    Easy live and quiet die.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I love weather like this,&rdquo; said Freddy.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe passed into it.
    </p>
    <p>
      The two main facts were clear. She had behaved splendidly, and he had
      helped her. He could not expect to master the details of so big a change
      in a girl&rsquo;s life. If here and there he was dissatisfied or puzzled, he
      must acquiesce; she was choosing the better part.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Vacant heart and hand and eye&mdash;&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      Perhaps the song stated &ldquo;the better part&rdquo; rather too strongly. He half
      fancied that the soaring accompaniment&mdash;which he did not lose in the
      shout of the gale&mdash;really agreed with Freddy, and was gently
      criticizing the words that it adorned:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  &ldquo;Vacant heart and hand and eye
   Easy live and quiet die.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      However, for the fourth time Windy Corner lay poised below him&mdash;now
      as a beacon in the roaring tides of darkness.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0020" id="link2HCH0020">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter XIX: Lying to Mr. Emerson
    </h2>
    <p>
      The Miss Alans were found in their beloved temperance hotel near
      Bloomsbury&mdash;a clean, airless establishment much patronized by
      provincial England. They always perched there before crossing the great
      seas, and for a week or two would fidget gently over clothes, guide-books,
      mackintosh squares, digestive bread, and other Continental necessaries.
      That there are shops abroad, even in Athens, never occurred to them, for
      they regarded travel as a species of warfare, only to be undertaken by
      those who have been fully armed at the Haymarket Stores. Miss Honeychurch,
      they trusted, would take care to equip herself duly. Quinine could now be
      obtained in tabloids; paper soap was a great help towards freshening up
      one&rsquo;s face in the train. Lucy promised, a little depressed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But, of course, you know all about these things, and you have Mr. Vyse to
      help you. A gentleman is such a stand-by.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Honeychurch, who had come up to town with her daughter, began to drum
      nervously upon her card-case.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We think it so good of Mr. Vyse to spare you,&rdquo; Miss Catharine continued.
      &ldquo;It is not every young man who would be so unselfish. But perhaps he will
      come out and join you later on.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Or does his work keep him in London?&rdquo; said Miss Teresa, the more acute
      and less kindly of the two sisters.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;However, we shall see him when he sees you off. I do so long to see him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No one will see Lucy off,&rdquo; interposed Mrs. Honeychurch. &ldquo;She doesn&rsquo;t like
      it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I hate seeings-off,&rdquo; said Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Really? How funny! I should have thought that in this case&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Mrs. Honeychurch, you aren&rsquo;t going? It is such a pleasure to have met
      you!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They escaped, and Lucy said with relief: &ldquo;That&rsquo;s all right. We just got
      through that time.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But her mother was annoyed. &ldquo;I should be told, dear, that I am
      unsympathetic. But I cannot see why you didn&rsquo;t tell your friends about
      Cecil and be done with it. There all the time we had to sit fencing, and
      almost telling lies, and be seen through, too, I dare say, which is most
      unpleasant.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy had plenty to say in reply. She described the Miss Alans&rsquo; character:
      they were such gossips, and if one told them, the news would be everywhere
      in no time.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But why shouldn&rsquo;t it be everywhere in no time?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because I settled with Cecil not to announce it until I left England. I
      shall tell them then. It&rsquo;s much pleasanter. How wet it is! Let&rsquo;s turn in
      here.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Here&rdquo; was the British Museum. Mrs. Honeychurch refused. If they must take
      shelter, let it be in a shop. Lucy felt contemptuous, for she was on the
      tack of caring for Greek sculpture, and had already borrowed a mythical
      dictionary from Mr. Beebe to get up the names of the goddesses and gods.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, well, let it be shop, then. Let&rsquo;s go to Mudie&rsquo;s. I&rsquo;ll buy a
      guide-book.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You know, Lucy, you and Charlotte and Mr. Beebe all tell me I&rsquo;m so
      stupid, so I suppose I am, but I shall never understand this
      hole-and-corner work. You&rsquo;ve got rid of Cecil&mdash;well and good, and I&rsquo;m
      thankful he&rsquo;s gone, though I did feel angry for the minute. But why not
      announce it? Why this hushing up and tip-toeing?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s only for a few days.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But why at all?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy was silent. She was drifting away from her mother. It was quite easy
      to say, &ldquo;Because George Emerson has been bothering me, and if he hears
      I&rsquo;ve given up Cecil may begin again&rdquo;&mdash;quite easy, and it had the
      incidental advantage of being true. But she could not say it. She disliked
      confidences, for they might lead to self-knowledge and to that king of
      terrors&mdash;Light. Ever since that last evening at Florence she had
      deemed it unwise to reveal her soul.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Honeychurch, too, was silent. She was thinking, &ldquo;My daughter won&rsquo;t
      answer me; she would rather be with those inquisitive old maids than with
      Freddy and me. Any rag, tag, and bobtail apparently does if she can leave
      her home.&rdquo; And as in her case thoughts never remained unspoken long, she
      burst out with: &ldquo;You&rsquo;re tired of Windy Corner.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      This was perfectly true. Lucy had hoped to return to Windy Corner when she
      escaped from Cecil, but she discovered that her home existed no longer. It
      might exist for Freddy, who still lived and thought straight, but not for
      one who had deliberately warped the brain. She did not acknowledge that
      her brain was warped, for the brain itself must assist in that
      acknowledgment, and she was disordering the very instruments of life. She
      only felt, &ldquo;I do not love George; I broke off my engagement because I did
      not love George; I must go to Greece because I do not love George; it is
      more important that I should look up gods in the dictionary than that I
      should help my mother; everyone else is behaving very badly.&rdquo; She only
      felt irritable and petulant, and anxious to do what she was not expected
      to do, and in this spirit she proceeded with the conversation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, mother, what rubbish you talk! Of course I&rsquo;m not tired of Windy
      Corner.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then why not say so at once, instead of considering half an hour?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She laughed faintly, &ldquo;Half a minute would be nearer.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps you would like to stay away from your home altogether?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hush, mother! People will hear you&rdquo;; for they had entered Mudie&rsquo;s. She
      bought Baedeker, and then continued: &ldquo;Of course I want to live at home;
      but as we are talking about it, I may as well say that I shall want to be
      away in the future more than I have been. You see, I come into my money
      next year.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Tears came into her mother&rsquo;s eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      Driven by nameless bewilderment, by what is in older people termed
      &ldquo;eccentricity,&rdquo; Lucy determined to make this point clear. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve seen the
      world so little&mdash;I felt so out of things in Italy. I have seen so
      little of life; one ought to come up to London more&mdash;not a cheap
      ticket like to-day, but to stop. I might even share a flat for a little
      with some other girl.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And mess with typewriters and latch-keys,&rdquo; exploded Mrs. Honeychurch.
      &ldquo;And agitate and scream, and be carried off kicking by the police. And
      call it a Mission&mdash;when no one wants you! And call it Duty&mdash;when
      it means that you can&rsquo;t stand your own home! And call it Work&mdash;when
      thousands of men are starving with the competition as it is! And then to
      prepare yourself, find two doddering old ladies, and go abroad with them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want more independence,&rdquo; said Lucy lamely; she knew that she wanted
      something, and independence is a useful cry; we can always say that we
      have not got it. She tried to remember her emotions in Florence: those had
      been sincere and passionate, and had suggested beauty rather than short
      skirts and latch-keys. But independence was certainly her cue.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well. Take your independence and be gone. Rush up and down and round
      the world, and come back as thin as a lath with the bad food. Despise the
      house that your father built and the garden that he planted, and our dear
      view&mdash;and then share a flat with another girl.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy screwed up her mouth and said: &ldquo;Perhaps I spoke hastily.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, goodness!&rdquo; her mother flashed. &ldquo;How you do remind me of Charlotte
      Bartlett!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Charlotte!&rdquo; flashed Lucy in her turn, pierced at last by a vivid pain.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;More every moment.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know what you mean, mother; Charlotte and I are not the very
      least alike.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I see the likeness. The same eternal worrying, the same taking back
      of words. You and Charlotte trying to divide two apples among three people
      last night might be sisters.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What rubbish! And if you dislike Charlotte so, it&rsquo;s rather a pity you
      asked her to stop. I warned you about her; I begged you, implored you not
      to, but of course it was not listened to.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There you go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I beg your pardon?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Charlotte again, my dear; that&rsquo;s all; her very words.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy clenched her teeth. &ldquo;My point is that you oughtn&rsquo;t to have asked
      Charlotte to stop. I wish you would keep to the point.&rdquo; And the
      conversation died off into a wrangle.
    </p>
    <p>
      She and her mother shopped in silence, spoke little in the train, little
      again in the carriage, which met them at Dorking Station. It had poured
      all day and as they ascended through the deep Surrey lanes showers of
      water fell from the over-hanging beech-trees and rattled on the hood. Lucy
      complained that the hood was stuffy. Leaning forward, she looked out into
      the steaming dusk, and watched the carriage-lamp pass like a search-light
      over mud and leaves, and reveal nothing beautiful. &ldquo;The crush when
      Charlotte gets in will be abominable,&rdquo; she remarked. For they were to pick
      up Miss Bartlett at Summer Street, where she had been dropped as the
      carriage went down, to pay a call on Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s old mother. &ldquo;We shall
      have to sit three a side, because the trees drop, and yet it isn&rsquo;t
      raining. Oh, for a little air!&rdquo; Then she listened to the horse&rsquo;s hoofs&mdash;&ldquo;He
      has not told&mdash;he has not told.&rdquo; That melody was blurred by the soft
      road. &ldquo;CAN&rsquo;T we have the hood down?&rdquo; she demanded, and her mother, with
      sudden tenderness, said: &ldquo;Very well, old lady, stop the horse.&rdquo; And the
      horse was stopped, and Lucy and Powell wrestled with the hood, and
      squirted water down Mrs. Honeychurch&rsquo;s neck. But now that the hood was
      down, she did see something that she would have missed&mdash;there were no
      lights in the windows of Cissie Villa, and round the garden gate she
      fancied she saw a padlock.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is that house to let again, Powell?&rdquo; she called.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, miss,&rdquo; he replied.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have they gone?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is too far out of town for the young gentleman, and his father&rsquo;s
      rheumatism has come on, so he can&rsquo;t stop on alone, so they are trying to
      let furnished,&rdquo; was the answer.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They have gone, then?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, miss, they have gone.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy sank back. The carriage stopped at the Rectory. She got out to call
      for Miss Bartlett. So the Emersons had gone, and all this bother about
      Greece had been unnecessary. Waste! That word seemed to sum up the whole
      of life. Wasted plans, wasted money, wasted love, and she had wounded her
      mother. Was it possible that she had muddled things away? Quite possible.
      Other people had. When the maid opened the door, she was unable to speak,
      and stared stupidly into the hall.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett at once came forward, and after a long preamble asked a
      great favour: might she go to church? Mr. Beebe and his mother had already
      gone, but she had refused to start until she obtained her hostess&rsquo;s full
      sanction, for it would mean keeping the horse waiting a good ten minutes
      more.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Certainly,&rdquo; said the hostess wearily. &ldquo;I forgot it was Friday. Let&rsquo;s all
      go. Powell can go round to the stables.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy dearest&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No church for me, thank you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A sigh, and they departed. The church was invisible, but up in the
      darkness to the left there was a hint of colour. This was a stained
      window, through which some feeble light was shining, and when the door
      opened Lucy heard Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s voice running through the litany to a minute
      congregation. Even their church, built upon the slope of the hill so
      artfully, with its beautiful raised transept and its spire of silvery
      shingle&mdash;even their church had lost its charm; and the thing one
      never talked about&mdash;religion&mdash;was fading like all the other
      things.
    </p>
    <p>
      She followed the maid into the Rectory.
    </p>
    <p>
      Would she object to sitting in Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s study? There was only that one
      fire.
    </p>
    <p>
      She would not object.
    </p>
    <p>
      Some one was there already, for Lucy heard the words: &ldquo;A lady to wait,
      sir.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Old Mr. Emerson was sitting by the fire, with his foot upon a gout-stool.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Miss Honeychurch, that you should come!&rdquo; he quavered; and Lucy saw an
      alteration in him since last Sunday.
    </p>
    <p>
      Not a word would come to her lips. George she had faced, and could have
      faced again, but she had forgotten how to treat his father.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Honeychurch, dear, we are so sorry! George is so sorry! He thought
      he had a right to try. I cannot blame my boy, and yet I wish he had told
      me first. He ought not to have tried. I knew nothing about it at all.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      If only she could remember how to behave!
    </p>
    <p>
      He held up his hand. &ldquo;But you must not scold him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy turned her back, and began to look at Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s books.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I taught him,&rdquo; he quavered, &ldquo;to trust in love. I said: &lsquo;When love comes,
      that is reality.&rsquo; I said: &lsquo;Passion does not blind. No. Passion is sanity,
      and the woman you love, she is the only person you will ever really
      understand.&rsquo;&rdquo; He sighed: &ldquo;True, everlastingly true, though my day is over,
      and though there is the result. Poor boy! He is so sorry! He said he knew
      it was madness when you brought your cousin in; that whatever you felt you
      did not mean. Yet&rdquo;&mdash;his voice gathered strength: he spoke out to make
      certain&mdash;&ldquo;Miss Honeychurch, do you remember Italy?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy selected a book&mdash;a volume of Old Testament commentaries. Holding
      it up to her eyes, she said: &ldquo;I have no wish to discuss Italy or any
      subject connected with your son.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you do remember it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He has misbehaved himself from the first.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I only was told that he loved you last Sunday. I never could judge
      behaviour. I&mdash;I&mdash;suppose he has.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Feeling a little steadier, she put the book back and turned round to him.
      His face was drooping and swollen, but his eyes, though they were sunken
      deep, gleamed with a child&rsquo;s courage.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, he has behaved abominably,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;I am glad he is sorry. Do you
      know what he did?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not &lsquo;abominably,&rsquo;&rdquo; was the gentle correction. &ldquo;He only tried when he
      should not have tried. You have all you want, Miss Honeychurch: you are
      going to marry the man you love. Do not go out of George&rsquo;s life saying he
      is abominable.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, of course,&rdquo; said Lucy, ashamed at the reference to Cecil.
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Abominable&rsquo; is much too strong. I am sorry I used it about your son. I
      think I will go to church, after all. My mother and my cousin have gone. I
      shall not be so very late&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Especially as he has gone under,&rdquo; he said quietly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What was that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Gone under naturally.&rdquo; He beat his palms together in silence; his head
      fell on his chest.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t understand.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;As his mother did.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But, Mr. Emerson&mdash;MR. EMERSON&mdash;what are you talking about?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When I wouldn&rsquo;t have George baptized,&rdquo; said he.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy was frightened.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And she agreed that baptism was nothing, but he caught that fever when he
      was twelve and she turned round. She thought it a judgement.&rdquo; He shuddered.
      &ldquo;Oh, horrible, when we had given up that sort of thing and broken away
      from her parents. Oh, horrible&mdash;worst of all&mdash;worse than death,
      when you have made a little clearing in the wilderness, planted your
      little garden, let in your sunlight, and then the weeds creep in again! A
      judgement! And our boy had typhoid because no clergyman had dropped water
      on him in church! Is it possible, Miss Honeychurch? Shall we slip back
      into the darkness for ever?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know,&rdquo; gasped Lucy. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t understand this sort of thing. I was
      not meant to understand it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But Mr. Eager&mdash;he came when I was out, and acted according to his
      principles. I don&rsquo;t blame him or any one... but by the time George was
      well she was ill. He made her think about sin, and she went under thinking
      about it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It was thus that Mr. Emerson had murdered his wife in the sight of God.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, how terrible!&rdquo; said Lucy, forgetting her own affairs at last.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He was not baptized,&rdquo; said the old man. &ldquo;I did hold firm.&rdquo; And he looked
      with unwavering eyes at the rows of books, as if&mdash;at what cost!&mdash;he
      had won a victory over them. &ldquo;My boy shall go back to the earth
      untouched.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She asked whether young Mr. Emerson was ill.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh&mdash;last Sunday.&rdquo; He started into the present. &ldquo;George last Sunday&mdash;no,
      not ill: just gone under. He is never ill. But he is his mother&rsquo;s son. Her
      eyes were his, and she had that forehead that I think so beautiful, and he
      will not think it worth while to live. It was always touch and go. He will
      live; but he will not think it worth while to live. He will never think
      anything worth while. You remember that church at Florence?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy did remember, and how she had suggested that George should collect
      postage stamps.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;After you left Florence&mdash;horrible. Then we took the house here, and
      he goes bathing with your brother, and became better. You saw him
      bathing?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am so sorry, but it is no good discussing this affair. I am deeply
      sorry about it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then there came something about a novel. I didn&rsquo;t follow it at all; I had
      to hear so much, and he minded telling me; he finds me too old. Ah, well,
      one must have failures. George comes down to-morrow, and takes me up to
      his London rooms. He can&rsquo;t bear to be about here, and I must be where he
      is.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Emerson,&rdquo; cried the girl, &ldquo;don&rsquo;t leave at least, not on my account. I
      am going to Greece. Don&rsquo;t leave your comfortable house.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It was the first time her voice had been kind and he smiled. &ldquo;How good
      everyone is! And look at Mr. Beebe housing me&mdash;came over this
      morning and heard I was going! Here I am so comfortable with a fire.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, but you won&rsquo;t go back to London. It&rsquo;s absurd.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I must be with George; I must make him care to live, and down here he
      can&rsquo;t. He says the thought of seeing you and of hearing about you&mdash;I
      am not justifying him: I am only saying what has happened.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Mr. Emerson&rdquo;&mdash;she took hold of his hand&mdash;&ldquo;you mustn&rsquo;t. I&rsquo;ve
      been bother enough to the world by now. I can&rsquo;t have you moving out of
      your house when you like it, and perhaps losing money through it&mdash;all
      on my account. You must stop! I am just going to Greece.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All the way to Greece?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Her manner altered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To Greece?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So you must stop. You won&rsquo;t talk about this business, I know. I can trust
      you both.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Certainly you can. We either have you in our lives, or leave you to the
      life that you have chosen.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I shouldn&rsquo;t want&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suppose Mr. Vyse is very angry with George? No, it was wrong of George
      to try. We have pushed our beliefs too far. I fancy that we deserve
      sorrow.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She looked at the books again&mdash;black, brown, and that acrid
      theological blue. They surrounded the visitors on every side; they were
      piled on the tables, they pressed against the very ceiling. To Lucy who
      could not see that Mr. Emerson was profoundly religious, and differed from
      Mr. Beebe chiefly by his acknowledgment of passion&mdash;it seemed
      dreadful that the old man should crawl into such a sanctum, when he was
      unhappy, and be dependent on the bounty of a clergyman.
    </p>
    <p>
      More certain than ever that she was tired, he offered her his chair.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, please sit still. I think I will sit in the carriage.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Honeychurch, you do sound tired.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not a bit,&rdquo; said Lucy, with trembling lips.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you are, and there&rsquo;s a look of George about you. And what were you
      saying about going abroad?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She was silent.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Greece&rdquo;&mdash;and she saw that he was thinking the word over&mdash;&ldquo;Greece;
      but you were to be married this year, I thought.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not till January, it wasn&rsquo;t,&rdquo; said Lucy, clasping her hands. Would she
      tell an actual lie when it came to the point?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suppose that Mr. Vyse is going with you. I hope&mdash;it isn&rsquo;t because
      George spoke that you are both going?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hope that you will enjoy Greece with Mr. Vyse.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Thank you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At that moment Mr. Beebe came back from church. His cassock was covered
      with rain. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s all right,&rdquo; he said kindly. &ldquo;I counted on you two
      keeping each other company. It&rsquo;s pouring again. The entire congregation,
      which consists of your cousin, your mother, and my mother, stands waiting
      in the church, till the carriage fetches it. Did Powell go round?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think so; I&rsquo;ll see.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;of course, I&rsquo;ll see. How are the Miss Alans?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well, thank you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Did you tell Mr. Emerson about Greece?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&mdash;I did.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you think it very plucky of her, Mr. Emerson, to undertake the two
      Miss Alans? Now, Miss Honeychurch, go back&mdash;keep warm. I think three
      is such a courageous number to go travelling.&rdquo; And he hurried off to the
      stables.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He is not going,&rdquo; she said hoarsely. &ldquo;I made a slip. Mr. Vyse does stop
      behind in England.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Somehow it was impossible to cheat this old man. To George, to Cecil, she
      would have lied again; but he seemed so near the end of things, so
      dignified in his approach to the gulf, of which he gave one account, and
      the books that surrounded him another, so mild to the rough paths that he
      had traversed, that the true chivalry&mdash;not the worn-out chivalry of
      sex, but the true chivalry that all the young may show to all the old&mdash;awoke
      in her, and, at whatever risk, she told him that Cecil was not her
      companion to Greece. And she spoke so seriously that the risk became a
      certainty, and he, lifting his eyes, said: &ldquo;You are leaving him? You are
      leaving the man you love?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&mdash;I had to.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, Miss Honeychurch, why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Terror came over her, and she lied again. She made the long, convincing
      speech that she had made to Mr. Beebe, and intended to make to the world
      when she announced that her engagement was no more. He heard her in
      silence, and then said: &ldquo;My dear, I am worried about you. It seems to me&rdquo;&mdash;dreamily;
      she was not alarmed&mdash;&ldquo;that you are in a muddle.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She shook her head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Take an old man&rsquo;s word; there&rsquo;s nothing worse than a muddle in all the
      world. It is easy to face Death and Fate, and the things that sound so
      dreadful. It is on my muddles that I look back with horror&mdash;on the
      things that I might have avoided. We can help one another but little. I
      used to think I could teach young people the whole of life, but I know
      better now, and all my teaching of George has come down to this: beware of
      muddle. Do you remember in that church, when you pretended to be annoyed
      with me and weren&rsquo;t? Do you remember before, when you refused the room
      with the view? Those were muddles&mdash;little, but ominous&mdash;and I am
      fearing that you are in one now.&rdquo; She was silent. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t trust me, Miss
      Honeychurch. Though life is very glorious, it is difficult.&rdquo; She was still
      silent. &ldquo;&lsquo;Life&rsquo; wrote a friend of mine, &lsquo;is a public performance on the
      violin, in which you must learn the instrument as you go along.&rsquo; I think
      he puts it well. Man has to pick up the use of his functions as he goes
      along&mdash;especially the function of Love.&rdquo; Then he burst out excitedly;
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s it; that&rsquo;s what I mean. You love George!&rdquo; And after his long
      preamble, the three words burst against Lucy like waves from the open sea.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you do,&rdquo; he went on, not waiting for contradiction. &ldquo;You love the boy
      body and soul, plainly, directly, as he loves you, and no other word
      expresses it. You won&rsquo;t marry the other man for his sake.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How dare you!&rdquo; gasped Lucy, with the roaring of waters in her ears. &ldquo;Oh,
      how like a man!&mdash;I mean, to suppose that a woman is always thinking
      about a man.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you are.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She summoned physical disgust.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re shocked, but I mean to shock you. It&rsquo;s the only hope at times. I
      can reach you no other way. You must marry, or your life will be wasted.
      You have gone too far to retreat. I have no time for the tenderness, and
      the comradeship, and the poetry, and the things that really matter, and
      for which you marry. I know that, with George, you will find them, and
      that you love him. Then be his wife. He is already part of you. Though you
      fly to Greece, and never see him again, or forget his very name, George
      will work in your thoughts till you die. It isn&rsquo;t possible to love and to
      part. You will wish that it was. You can transmute love, ignore it, muddle
      it, but you can never pull it out of you. I know by experience that the
      poets are right: love is eternal.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy began to cry with anger, and though her anger passed away soon, her
      tears remained.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I only wish poets would say this, too: love is of the body; not the body,
      but of the body. Ah! the misery that would be saved if we confessed that!
      Ah! for a little directness to liberate the soul! Your soul, dear Lucy! I
      hate the word now, because of all the cant with which superstition has
      wrapped it round. But we have souls. I cannot say how they came nor
      whither they go, but we have them, and I see you ruining yours. I cannot
      bear it. It is again the darkness creeping in; it is hell.&rdquo; Then he
      checked himself. &ldquo;What nonsense I have talked&mdash;how abstract and
      remote! And I have made you cry! Dear girl, forgive my prosiness; marry my
      boy. When I think what life is, and how seldom love is answered by love&mdash;Marry
      him; it is one of the moments for which the world was made.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She could not understand him; the words were indeed remote. Yet as he
      spoke the darkness was withdrawn, veil after veil, and she saw to the
      bottom of her soul.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then, Lucy&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;ve frightened me,&rdquo; she moaned. &ldquo;Cecil&mdash;Mr. Beebe&mdash;the
      ticket&rsquo;s bought&mdash;everything.&rdquo; She fell sobbing into the chair. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m
      caught in the tangle. I must suffer and grow old away from him. I cannot
      break the whole of life for his sake. They trusted me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A carriage drew up at the front-door.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Give George my love&mdash;once only. Tell him &lsquo;muddle.&rsquo;&rdquo; Then she
      arranged her veil, while the tears poured over her cheeks inside.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;they are in the hall&mdash;oh, please not, Mr. Emerson&mdash;they
      trust me&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But why should they, when you have deceived them?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe opened the door, saying: &ldquo;Here&rsquo;s my mother.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re not worthy of their trust.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&rsquo;s that?&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe sharply.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I was saying, why should you trust her when she deceived you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;One minute, mother.&rdquo; He came in and shut the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t follow you, Mr. Emerson. To whom do you refer? Trust whom?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I mean she has pretended to you that she did not love George. They have
      loved one another all along.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe looked at the sobbing girl. He was very quiet, and his white
      face, with its ruddy whiskers, seemed suddenly inhuman. A long black
      column, he stood and awaited her reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I shall never marry him,&rdquo; quavered Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      A look of contempt came over him, and he said, &ldquo;Why not?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Beebe&mdash;I have misled you&mdash;I have misled myself&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, rubbish, Miss Honeychurch!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is not rubbish!&rdquo; said the old man hotly. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s the part of people that
      you don&rsquo;t understand.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe laid his hand on the old man&rsquo;s shoulder pleasantly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy! Lucy!&rdquo; called voices from the carriage.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Beebe, could you help me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He looked amazed at the request, and said in a low, stern voice: &ldquo;I am
      more grieved than I can possibly express. It is lamentable, lamentable&mdash;incredible.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&rsquo;s wrong with the boy?&rdquo; fired up the other again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nothing, Mr. Emerson, except that he no longer interests me. Marry
      George, Miss Honeychurch. He will do admirably.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He walked out and left them. They heard him guiding his mother up-stairs.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy!&rdquo; the voices called.
    </p>
    <p>
      She turned to Mr. Emerson in despair. But his face revived her. It was the
      face of a saint who understood.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now it is all dark. Now Beauty and Passion seem never to have existed. I
      know. But remember the mountains over Florence and the view. Ah, dear, if
      I were George, and gave you one kiss, it would make you brave. You have to
      go cold into a battle that needs warmth, out into the muddle that you have
      made yourself; and your mother and all your friends will despise you, oh,
      my darling, and rightly, if it is ever right to despise. George still
      dark, all the tussle and the misery without a word from him. Am I
      justified?&rdquo; Into his own eyes tears came. &ldquo;Yes, for we fight for more than
      Love or Pleasure; there is Truth. Truth counts, Truth does count.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You kiss me,&rdquo; said the girl. &ldquo;You kiss me. I will try.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He gave her a sense of deities reconciled, a feeling that, in gaining the
      man she loved, she would gain something for the whole world. Throughout
      the squalor of her homeward drive&mdash;she spoke at once&mdash;his
      salutation remained. He had robbed the body of its taint, the world&rsquo;s
      taunts of their sting; he had shown her the holiness of direct desire. She
      &ldquo;never exactly understood,&rdquo; she would say in after years, &ldquo;how he managed
      to strengthen her. It was as if he had made her see the whole of
      everything at once.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0021" id="link2HCH0021">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      Chapter XX: The End of the Middle Ages
    </h2>
    <p>
      The Miss Alans did go to Greece, but they went by themselves. They alone
      of this little company will double Malea and plough the waters of the
      Saronic gulf. They alone will visit Athens and Delphi, and either shrine
      of intellectual song&mdash;that upon the Acropolis, encircled by blue
      seas; that under Parnassus, where the eagles build and the bronze
      charioteer drives undismayed towards infinity. Trembling, anxious,
      cumbered with much digestive bread, they did proceed to Constantinople,
      they did go round the world. The rest of us must be contented with a fair,
      but a less arduous, goal. Italiam petimus: we return to the Pension
      Bertolini.
    </p>
    <p>
      George said it was his old room.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, it isn&rsquo;t,&rdquo; said Lucy; &ldquo;because it is the room I had, and I had your
      father&rsquo;s room. I forget why; Charlotte made me, for some reason.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He knelt on the tiled floor, and laid his face in her lap.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;George, you baby, get up.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why shouldn&rsquo;t I be a baby?&rdquo; murmured George.
    </p>
    <p>
      Unable to answer this question, she put down his sock, which she was
      trying to mend, and gazed out through the window. It was evening and again
      the spring.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, bother Charlotte,&rdquo; she said thoughtfully. &ldquo;What can such people be
      made of?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Same stuff as parsons are made of.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nonsense!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Quite right. It is nonsense.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now you get up off the cold floor, or you&rsquo;ll be starting rheumatism next,
      and you stop laughing and being so silly.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why shouldn&rsquo;t I laugh?&rdquo; he asked, pinning her with his elbows, and
      advancing his face to hers. &ldquo;What&rsquo;s there to cry at? Kiss me here.&rdquo; He
      indicated the spot where a kiss would be welcome.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was a boy after all. When it came to the point, it was she who
      remembered the past, she into whose soul the iron had entered, she who
      knew whose room this had been last year. It endeared him to her strangely
      that he should be sometimes wrong.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Any letters?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Just a line from Freddy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now kiss me here; then here.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Then, threatened again with rheumatism, he strolled to the window, opened
      it (as the English will), and leant out. There was the parapet, there the
      river, there to the left the beginnings of the hills. The cab-driver, who
      at once saluted him with the hiss of a serpent, might be that very
      Phaethon who had set this happiness in motion twelve months ago. A passion
      of gratitude&mdash;all feelings grow to passions in the South&mdash;came
      over the husband, and he blessed the people and the things who had taken
      so much trouble about a young fool. He had helped himself, it is true, but
      how stupidly!
    </p>
    <p>
      All the fighting that mattered had been done by others&mdash;by Italy, by
      his father, by his wife.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy, you come and look at the cypresses; and the church, whatever its
      name is, still shows.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;San Miniato. I&rsquo;ll just finish your sock.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Signorino, domani faremo uno giro,&rdquo; called the cabman, with engaging
      certainty.
    </p>
    <p>
      George told him that he was mistaken; they had no money to throw away on
      driving.
    </p>
    <p>
      And the people who had not meant to help&mdash;the Miss Lavishes, the
      Cecils, the Miss Bartletts! Ever prone to magnify Fate, George counted up
      the forces that had swept him into this contentment.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Anything good in Freddy&rsquo;s letter?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not yet.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      His own content was absolute, but hers held bitterness: the Honeychurches
      had not forgiven them; they were disgusted at her past hypocrisy; she had
      alienated Windy Corner, perhaps for ever.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What does he say?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Silly boy! He thinks he&rsquo;s being dignified. He knew we should go off in
      the spring&mdash;he has known it for six months&mdash;that if mother
      wouldn&rsquo;t give her consent we should take the thing into our own hands.
      They had fair warning, and now he calls it an elopement. Ridiculous boy&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Signorino, domani faremo uno giro&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But it will all come right in the end. He has to build us both up from
      the beginning again. I wish, though, that Cecil had not turned so cynical
      about women. He has, for the second time, quite altered. Why will men have
      theories about women? I haven&rsquo;t any about men. I wish, too, that Mr. Beebe&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You may well wish that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He will never forgive us&mdash;I mean, he will never be interested in us
      again. I wish that he did not influence them so much at Windy Corner. I
      wish he hadn&rsquo;t&mdash;But if we act the truth, the people who really love
      us are sure to come back to us in the long run.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps.&rdquo; Then he said more gently: &ldquo;Well, I acted the truth&mdash;the
      only thing I did do&mdash;and you came back to me. So possibly you know.&rdquo;
       He turned back into the room. &ldquo;Nonsense with that sock.&rdquo; He carried her to
      the window, so that she, too, saw all the view. They sank upon their
      knees, invisible from the road, they hoped, and began to whisper one
      another&rsquo;s names. Ah! it was worth while; it was the great joy that they
      had expected, and countless little joys of which they had never dreamt.
      They were silent.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Signorino, domani faremo&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, bother that man!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But Lucy remembered the vendor of photographs and said, &ldquo;No, don&rsquo;t be rude
      to him.&rdquo; Then with a catching of her breath, she murmured: &ldquo;Mr. Eager and
      Charlotte, dreadful frozen Charlotte. How cruel she would be to a man like
      that!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Look at the lights going over the bridge.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But this room reminds me of Charlotte. How horrible to grow old in
      Charlotte&rsquo;s way! To think that evening at the rectory that she shouldn&rsquo;t
      have heard your father was in the house. For she would have stopped me
      going in, and he was the only person alive who could have made me see
      sense. You couldn&rsquo;t have made me. When I am very happy&rdquo;&mdash;she kissed
      him&mdash;&ldquo;I remember on how little it all hangs. If Charlotte had only
      known, she would have stopped me going in, and I should have gone to silly
      Greece, and become different for ever.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But she did know,&rdquo; said George; &ldquo;she did see my father, surely. He said
      so.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, no, she didn&rsquo;t see him. She was upstairs with old Mrs. Beebe, don&rsquo;t
      you remember, and then went straight to the church. She said so.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      George was obstinate again. &ldquo;My father,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;saw her, and I prefer
      his word. He was dozing by the study fire, and he opened his eyes, and
      there was Miss Bartlett. A few minutes before you came in. She was turning
      to go as he woke up. He didn&rsquo;t speak to her.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Then they spoke of other things&mdash;the desultory talk of those who have
      been fighting to reach one another, and whose reward is to rest quietly in
      each other&rsquo;s arms. It was long ere they returned to Miss Bartlett, but
      when they did her behaviour seemed more interesting. George, who disliked
      any darkness, said: &ldquo;It&rsquo;s clear that she knew. Then, why did she risk the
      meeting? She knew he was there, and yet she went to church.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They tried to piece the thing together.
    </p>
    <p>
      As they talked, an incredible solution came into Lucy&rsquo;s mind. She rejected
      it, and said: &ldquo;How like Charlotte to undo her work by a feeble muddle at
      the last moment.&rdquo; But something in the dying evening, in the roar of the
      river, in their very embrace warned them that her words fell short of
      life, and George whispered: &ldquo;Or did she mean it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mean what?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Signorino, domani faremo uno giro&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy bent forward and said with gentleness: &ldquo;Lascia, prego, lascia. Siamo
      sposati.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Scusi tanto, signora,&rdquo; he replied in tones as gentle and whipped up his
      horse.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Buona sera&mdash;e grazie.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Niente.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The cabman drove away singing.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mean what, George?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He whispered: &ldquo;Is it this? Is this possible? I&rsquo;ll put a marvel to you.
      That your cousin has always hoped. That from the very first moment we met,
      she hoped, far down in her mind, that we should be like this&mdash;of
      course, very far down. That she fought us on the surface, and yet she
      hoped. I can&rsquo;t explain her any other way. Can you? Look how she kept me
      alive in you all the summer; how she gave you no peace; how month after
      month she became more eccentric and unreliable. The sight of us haunted
      her&mdash;or she couldn&rsquo;t have described us as she did to her friend.
      There are details&mdash;it burnt. I read the book afterwards. She is not
      frozen, Lucy, she is not withered up all through. She tore us apart twice,
      but in the rectory that evening she was given one more chance to make us
      happy. We can never make friends with her or thank her. But I do believe
      that, far down in her heart, far below all speech and behaviour, she is
      glad.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is impossible,&rdquo; murmured Lucy, and then, remembering the experiences
      of her own heart, she said: &ldquo;No&mdash;it is just possible.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Youth enwrapped them; the song of Phaethon announced passion requited,
      love attained. But they were conscious of a love more mysterious than
      this. The song died away; they heard the river, bearing down the snows of
      winter into the Mediterranean.
    </p>
