<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8: Medieval</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
<h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span><span epub:type="subtitle">Medieval</span></h3>
    <p>
      The drawing-room curtains at Windy Corner had been pulled to meet, for the
      carpet was new and deserved protection from the August sun. They were
      heavy curtains, reaching almost to the ground, and the light that filtered
      through them was subdued and varied. A poet&mdash;none was present&mdash;might
      have quoted, &ldquo;Life like a dome of many coloured glass,&rdquo; or might have
      compared the curtains to sluice-gates, lowered against the intolerable
      tides of heaven. Without was poured a sea of radiance; within, the glory,
      though visible, was tempered to the capacities of man.
    </p>
    <p>
      Two pleasant people sat in the room. One&mdash;a boy of nineteen&mdash;was
      studying a small manual of anatomy, and peering occasionally at a bone
      which lay upon the piano. From time to time he bounced in his chair and
      puffed and groaned, for the day was hot and the print small, and the human
      frame fearfully made; and his mother, who was writing a letter, did
      continually read out to him what she had written. And continually did she
      rise from her seat and part the curtains so that a rivulet of light fell
      across the carpet, and make the remark that they were still there.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where aren&rsquo;t they?&rdquo; said the boy, who was Freddy, Lucy&rsquo;s brother. &ldquo;I tell
      you I&rsquo;m getting fairly sick.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;For goodness&rsquo; sake go out of my drawing-room, then?&rdquo; cried Mrs.
      Honeychurch, who hoped to cure her children of slang by taking it
      literally.
    </p>
    <p>
      Freddy did not move or reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think things are coming to a head,&rdquo; she observed, rather wanting her
      son&rsquo;s opinion on the situation if she could obtain it without undue
      supplication.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Time they did.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am glad that Cecil is asking her this once more.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s his third go, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Freddy I do call the way you talk unkind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t mean to be unkind.&rdquo; Then he added: &ldquo;But I do think Lucy might
      have got this off her chest in Italy. I don&rsquo;t know how girls manage
      things, but she can&rsquo;t have said &lsquo;No&rsquo; properly before, or she wouldn&rsquo;t have
      to say it again now. Over the whole thing&mdash;I can&rsquo;t explain&mdash;I do
      feel so uncomfortable.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you indeed, dear? How interesting!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I feel&mdash;never mind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He returned to his work.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Just listen to what I have written to Mrs. Vyse. I said: &lsquo;Dear Mrs.
      Vyse.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, mother, you told me. A jolly good letter.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I said: &lsquo;Dear Mrs. Vyse, Cecil has just asked my permission about it, and
      I should be delighted, if Lucy wishes it. But&mdash;&lsquo;&rdquo; She stopped
      reading, &ldquo;I was rather amused at Cecil asking my permission at all. He has
      always gone in for unconventionality, and parents nowhere, and so forth.
      When it comes to the point, he can&rsquo;t get on without me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nor me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Freddy nodded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He asked me for my permission also.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She exclaimed: &ldquo;How very odd of him!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why so?&rdquo; asked the son and heir. &ldquo;Why shouldn&rsquo;t my permission be asked?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you know about Lucy or girls or anything? What ever did you say?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I said to Cecil, &lsquo;Take her or leave her; it&rsquo;s no business of mine!&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What a helpful answer!&rdquo; But her own answer, though more normal in its
      wording, had been to the same effect.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The bother is this,&rdquo; began Freddy.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then he took up his work again, too shy to say what the bother was. Mrs.
      Honeychurch went back to the window.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Freddy, you must come. There they still are!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t see you ought to go peeping like that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Peeping like that! Can&rsquo;t I look out of my own window?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But she returned to the writing-table, observing, as she passed her son,
      &ldquo;Still page 322?&rdquo; Freddy snorted, and turned over two leaves. For a brief
      space they were silent. Close by, beyond the curtains, the gentle murmur
      of a long conversation had never ceased.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The bother is this: I have put my foot in it with Cecil most awfully.&rdquo; He
      gave a nervous gulp. &ldquo;Not content with &lsquo;permission&rsquo;, which I did give&mdash;that
      is to say, I said, &lsquo;I don&rsquo;t mind&rsquo;&mdash;well, not content with that, he
      wanted to know whether I wasn&rsquo;t off my head with joy. He practically put
      it like this: Wasn&rsquo;t it a splendid thing for Lucy and for Windy Corner
      generally if he married her? And he would have an answer&mdash;he said it
      would strengthen his hand.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hope you gave a careful answer, dear.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I answered &lsquo;No&rsquo;&rdquo; said the boy, grinding his teeth. &ldquo;There! Fly into a
      stew! I can&rsquo;t help it&mdash;had to say it. I had to say no. He ought never
      to have asked me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ridiculous child!&rdquo; cried his mother. &ldquo;You think you&rsquo;re so holy and
      truthful, but really it&rsquo;s only abominable conceit. Do you suppose that a
      man like Cecil would take the slightest notice of anything you say? I hope
      he boxed your ears. How dare you say no?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, do keep quiet, mother! I had to say no when I couldn&rsquo;t say yes. I
      tried to laugh as if I didn&rsquo;t mean what I said, and, as Cecil laughed too,
      and went away, it may be all right. But I feel my foot&rsquo;s in it. Oh, do
      keep quiet, though, and let a man do some work.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch, with the air of one who has considered the
      subject, &ldquo;I shall not keep quiet. You know all that has passed between
      them in Rome; you know why he is down here, and yet you deliberately
      insult him, and try to turn him out of my house.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not a bit!&rdquo; he pleaded. &ldquo;I only let out I didn&rsquo;t like him. I don&rsquo;t hate
      him, but I don&rsquo;t like him. What I mind is that he&rsquo;ll tell Lucy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He glanced at the curtains dismally.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I like him,&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch. &ldquo;I know his mother; he&rsquo;s good,
      he&rsquo;s clever, he&rsquo;s rich, he&rsquo;s well connected&mdash;Oh, you needn&rsquo;t kick the
      piano! He&rsquo;s well connected&mdash;I&rsquo;ll say it again if you like: he&rsquo;s well
      connected.&rdquo; She paused, as if rehearsing her eulogy, but her face remained
      dissatisfied. She added: &ldquo;And he has beautiful manners.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I liked him till just now. I suppose it&rsquo;s having him spoiling Lucy&rsquo;s
      first week at home; and it&rsquo;s also something that Mr. Beebe said, not
      knowing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Beebe?&rdquo; said his mother, trying to conceal her interest. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t see
      how Mr. Beebe comes in.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You know Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s funny way, when you never quite know what he means.
      He said: &lsquo;Mr. Vyse is an ideal bachelor.&rsquo; I was very cute, I asked him
      what he meant. He said &lsquo;Oh, he&rsquo;s like me&mdash;better detached.&rsquo; I
      couldn&rsquo;t make him say any more, but it set me thinking. Since Cecil has
      come after Lucy he hasn&rsquo;t been so pleasant, at least&mdash;I can&rsquo;t
      explain.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You never can, dear. But I can. You are jealous of Cecil because he may
      stop Lucy knitting you silk ties.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The explanation seemed plausible, and Freddy tried to accept it. But at
      the back of his brain there lurked a dim mistrust. Cecil praised one too
      much for being athletic. Was that it? Cecil made one talk in one&rsquo;s own
      way. This tired one. Was that it? And Cecil was the kind of fellow who
      would never wear another fellow&rsquo;s cap. Unaware of his own profundity,
      Freddy checked himself. He must be jealous, or he would not dislike a man
      for such foolish reasons.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Will this do?&rdquo; called his mother. &ldquo;&lsquo;Dear Mrs. Vyse,&mdash;Cecil has just
      asked my permission about it, and I should be delighted if Lucy wishes
      it.&rsquo; Then I put in at the top, &lsquo;and I have told Lucy so.&rsquo; I must write the
      letter out again&mdash;&lsquo;and I have told Lucy so. But Lucy seems very
      uncertain, and in these days young people must decide for themselves.&rsquo; I
      said that because I didn&rsquo;t want Mrs. Vyse to think us old-fashioned. She
      goes in for lectures and improving her mind, and all the time a thick
      layer of flue under the beds, and the maid&rsquo;s dirty thumb-marks where you
      turn on the electric light. She keeps that flat abominably&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Suppose Lucy marries Cecil, would she live in a flat, or in the country?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t interrupt so foolishly. Where was I? Oh yes&mdash;&lsquo;Young people
      must decide for themselves. I know that Lucy likes your son, because she
      tells me everything, and she wrote to me from Rome when he asked her
      first.&rsquo; No, I&rsquo;ll cross that last bit out&mdash;it looks patronizing. I&rsquo;ll
      stop at &lsquo;because she tells me everything.&rsquo; Or shall I cross that out,
      too?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cross it out, too,&rdquo; said Freddy.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Honeychurch left it in.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then the whole thing runs: &lsquo;Dear Mrs. Vyse.&mdash;Cecil has just asked my
      permission about it, and I should be delighted if Lucy wishes it, and I
      have told Lucy so. But Lucy seems very uncertain, and in these days young
      people must decide for themselves. I know that Lucy likes your son,
      because she tells me everything. But I do not know&mdash;&lsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Look out!&rdquo; cried Freddy.
    </p>
    <p>
      The curtains parted.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil&rsquo;s first movement was one of irritation. He couldn&rsquo;t bear the
      Honeychurch habit of sitting in the dark to save the furniture.
      Instinctively he give the curtains a twitch, and sent them swinging down
      their poles. Light entered. There was revealed a terrace, such as is owned
      by many villas with trees each side of it, and on it a little rustic seat,
      and two flower-beds. But it was transfigured by the view beyond, for Windy
      Corner was built on the range that overlooks the Sussex Weald. Lucy, who
      was in the little seat, seemed on the edge of a green magic carpet which
      hovered in the air above the tremulous world.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil entered.
    </p>
    <p>
      Appearing thus late in the story, Cecil must be at once described. He was
      medieval. Like a Gothic statue. Tall and refined, with shoulders that
      seemed braced square by an effort of the will, and a head that was tilted
      a little higher than the usual level of vision, he resembled those
      fastidious saints who guard the portals of a French cathedral. Well
      educated, well endowed, and not deficient physically, he remained in the
      grip of a certain devil whom the modern world knows as self-consciousness,
      and whom the medieval, with dimmer vision, worshipped as asceticism. A
      Gothic statue implies celibacy, just as a Greek statue implies fruition,
      and perhaps this was what Mr. Beebe meant. And Freddy, who ignored history
      and art, perhaps meant the same when he failed to imagine Cecil wearing
      another fellow&rsquo;s cap.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Honeychurch left her letter on the writing table and moved towards
      her young acquaintance.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Cecil!&rdquo; she exclaimed&mdash;&ldquo;oh, Cecil, do tell me!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I promessi sposi,&rdquo; said he.
    </p>
    <p>
      They stared at him anxiously.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She has accepted me,&rdquo; he said, and the sound of the thing in English made
      him flush and smile with pleasure, and look more human.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am so glad,&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch, while Freddy proffered a hand that
      was yellow with chemicals. They wished that they also knew Italian, for
      our phrases of approval and of amazement are so connected with little
      occasions that we fear to use them on great ones. We are obliged to become
      vaguely poetic, or to take refuge in Scriptural reminiscences.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Welcome as one of the family!&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch, waving her hand at
      the furniture. &ldquo;This is indeed a joyous day! I feel sure that you will
      make our dear Lucy happy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hope so,&rdquo; replied the young man, shifting his eyes to the ceiling.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We mothers&mdash;&rdquo; simpered Mrs. Honeychurch, and then realized that she
      was affected, sentimental, bombastic&mdash;all the things she hated most.
      Why could she not be Freddy, who stood stiff in the middle of the room;
      looking very cross and almost handsome?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I say, Lucy!&rdquo; called Cecil, for conversation seemed to flag.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy rose from the seat. She moved across the lawn and smiled in at them,
      just as if she was going to ask them to play tennis. Then she saw her
      brother&rsquo;s face. Her lips parted, and she took him in her arms. He said,
      &ldquo;Steady on!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not a kiss for me?&rdquo; asked her mother.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy kissed her also.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Would you take them into the garden and tell Mrs. Honeychurch all about
      it?&rdquo; Cecil suggested. &ldquo;And I&rsquo;d stop here and tell my mother.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We go with Lucy?&rdquo; said Freddy, as if taking orders.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, you go with Lucy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They passed into the sunlight. Cecil watched them cross the terrace, and
      descend out of sight by the steps. They would descend&mdash;he knew their
      ways&mdash;past the shrubbery, and past the tennis-lawn and the
      dahlia-bed, until they reached the kitchen garden, and there, in the
      presence of the potatoes and the peas, the great event would be discussed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Smiling indulgently, he lit a cigarette, and rehearsed the events that had
      led to such a happy conclusion.
    </p>
    <p>
      He had known Lucy for several years, but only as a commonplace girl who
      happened to be musical. He could still remember his depression that
      afternoon at Rome, when she and her terrible cousin fell on him out of the
      blue, and demanded to be taken to St. Peter&rsquo;s. That day she had seemed a
      typical tourist&mdash;shrill, crude, and gaunt with travel. But Italy
      worked some marvel in her. It gave her light, and&mdash;which he held more
      precious&mdash;it gave her shadow. Soon he detected in her a wonderful
      reticence. She was like a woman of Leonardo da Vinci&rsquo;s, whom we love not
      so much for herself as for the things that she will not tell us. The
      things are assuredly not of this life; no woman of Leonardo&rsquo;s could have
      anything so vulgar as a &ldquo;story.&rdquo; She did develop most wonderfully day by
      day.
    </p>
    <p>
      So it happened that from patronizing civility he had slowly passed if not
      to passion, at least to a profound uneasiness. Already at Rome he had
      hinted to her that they might be suitable for each other. It had touched
      him greatly that she had not broken away at the suggestion. Her refusal
      had been clear and gentle; after it&mdash;as the horrid phrase went&mdash;she
      had been exactly the same to him as before. Three months later, on the
      margin of Italy, among the flower-clad Alps, he had asked her again in
      bald, traditional language. She reminded him of a Leonardo more than ever;
      her sunburnt features were shadowed by fantastic rock; at his words she
      had turned and stood between him and the light with immeasurable plains
      behind her. He walked home with her unashamed, feeling not at all like a
      rejected suitor. The things that really mattered were unshaken.
    </p>
    <p>
      So now he had asked her once more, and, clear and gentle as ever, she had
      accepted him, giving no coy reasons for her delay, but simply saying that
      she loved him and would do her best to make him happy. His mother, too,
      would be pleased; she had counselled the step; he must write her a long
      account.
    </p>
    <p>
      Glancing at his hand, in case any of Freddy&rsquo;s chemicals had come off on
      it, he moved to the writing table. There he saw &ldquo;Dear Mrs. Vyse,&rdquo; followed
      by many erasures. He recoiled without reading any more, and after a little
      hesitation sat down elsewhere, and pencilled a note on his knee.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then he lit another cigarette, which did not seem quite as divine as the
      first, and considered what might be done to make Windy Corner drawing-room
      more distinctive. With that outlook it should have been a successful room,
      but the trail of Tottenham Court Road was upon it; he could almost
      visualize the motor-vans of Messrs. Shoolbred and Messrs. Maple arriving
      at the door and depositing this chair, those varnished book-cases, that
      writing-table. The table recalled Mrs. Honeychurch&rsquo;s letter. He did not
      want to read that letter&mdash;his temptations never lay in that
      direction; but he worried about it none the less. It was his own fault
      that she was discussing him with his mother; he had wanted her support in
      his third attempt to win Lucy; he wanted to feel that others, no matter
      who they were, agreed with him, and so he had asked their permission. Mrs.
      Honeychurch had been civil, but obtuse in essentials, while as for Freddy&mdash;&ldquo;He
      is only a boy,&rdquo; he reflected. &ldquo;I represent all that he despises. Why
      should he want me for a brother-in-law?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Honeychurches were a worthy family, but he began to realize that Lucy
      was of another clay; and perhaps&mdash;he did not put it very definitely&mdash;he
      ought to introduce her into more congenial circles as soon as possible.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Beebe!&rdquo; said the maid, and the new rector of Summer Street was shown
      in; he had at once started on friendly relations, owing to Lucy&rsquo;s praise
      of him in her letters from Florence.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil greeted him rather critically.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve come for tea, Mr. Vyse. Do you suppose that I shall get it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I should say so. Food is the thing one does get here&mdash;Don&rsquo;t sit in
      that chair; young Honeychurch has left a bone in it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Pfui!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know,&rdquo; said Cecil. &ldquo;I know. I can&rsquo;t think why Mrs. Honeychurch allows
      it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      For Cecil considered the bone and the Maples&rsquo; furniture separately; he did
      not realize that, taken together, they kindled the room into the life that
      he desired.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve come for tea and for gossip. Isn&rsquo;t this news?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;News? I don&rsquo;t understand you,&rdquo; said Cecil. &ldquo;News?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe, whose news was of a very different nature, prattled forward.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I met Sir Harry Otway as I came up; I have every reason to hope that I am
      first in the field. He has bought Cissie and Albert from Mr. Flack!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Has he indeed?&rdquo; said Cecil, trying to recover himself. Into what a
      grotesque mistake had he fallen! Was it likely that a clergyman and a
      gentleman would refer to his engagement in a manner so flippant? But his
      stiffness remained, and, though he asked who Cissie and Albert might be,
      he still thought Mr. Beebe rather a bounder.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Unpardonable question! To have stopped a week at Windy Corner and not to
      have met Cissie and Albert, the semi-detached villas that have been run up
      opposite the church! I&rsquo;ll set Mrs. Honeychurch after you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m shockingly stupid over local affairs,&rdquo; said the young man languidly.
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t even remember the difference between a Parish Council and a Local
      Government Board. Perhaps there is no difference, or perhaps those aren&rsquo;t
      the right names. I only go into the country to see my friends and to enjoy
      the scenery. It is very remiss of me. Italy and London are the only places
      where I don&rsquo;t feel to exist on sufferance.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe, distressed at this heavy reception of Cissie and Albert,
      determined to shift the subject.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let me see, Mr. Vyse&mdash;I forget&mdash;what is your profession?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have no profession,&rdquo; said Cecil. &ldquo;It is another example of my
      decadence. My attitude&mdash;quite an indefensible one&mdash;is that so long as
      I am no trouble to any one I have a right to do as I like. I know I ought
      to be getting money out of people, or devoting myself to things I don&rsquo;t
      care a straw about, but somehow, I&rsquo;ve not been able to begin.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are very fortunate,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe. &ldquo;It is a wonderful opportunity,
      the possession of leisure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      His voice was rather parochial, but he did not quite see his way to
      answering naturally. He felt, as all who have regular occupation must
      feel, that others should have it also.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am glad that you approve. I daren&rsquo;t face the healthy person&mdash;for
      example, Freddy Honeychurch.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Freddy&rsquo;s a good sort, isn&rsquo;t he?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Admirable. The sort who has made England what she is.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil wondered at himself. Why, on this day of all others, was he so
      hopelessly contrary? He tried to get right by inquiring effusively after
      Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s mother, an old lady for whom he had no particular regard. Then
      he flattered the clergyman, praised his liberal-mindedness, his
      enlightened attitude towards philosophy and science.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where are the others?&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe at last, &ldquo;I insist on extracting
      tea before evening service.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suppose Anne never told them you were here. In this house one is so
      coached in the servants the day one arrives. The fault of Anne is that she
      begs your pardon when she hears you perfectly, and kicks the chair-legs
      with her feet. The faults of Mary&mdash;I forget the faults of Mary, but
      they are very grave. Shall we look in the garden?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know the faults of Mary. She leaves the dust-pans standing on the
      stairs.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The fault of Euphemia is that she will not, simply will not, chop the
      suet sufficiently small.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They both laughed, and things began to go better.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The faults of Freddy&mdash;&rdquo; Cecil continued.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, he has too many. No one but his mother can remember the faults of
      Freddy. Try the faults of Miss Honeychurch; they are not innumerable.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She has none,&rdquo; said the young man, with grave sincerity.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I quite agree. At present she has none.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;At present?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not cynical. I&rsquo;m only thinking of my pet theory about Miss
      Honeychurch. Does it seem reasonable that she should play so wonderfully,
      and live so quietly? I suspect that one day she will be wonderful in both.
      The water-tight compartments in her will break down, and music and life
      will mingle. Then we shall have her heroically good, heroically bad&mdash;too
      heroic, perhaps, to be good or bad.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil found his companion interesting.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And at present you think her not wonderful as far as life goes?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I must say I&rsquo;ve only seen her at Tunbridge Wells, where she was not
      wonderful, and at Florence. Since I came to Summer Street she has been
      away. You saw her, didn&rsquo;t you, at Rome and in the Alps. Oh, I forgot; of
      course, you knew her before. No, she wasn&rsquo;t wonderful in Florence either,
      but I kept on expecting that she would be.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In what way?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Conversation had become agreeable to them, and they were pacing up and
      down the terrace.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I could as easily tell you what tune she&rsquo;ll play next. There was simply
      the sense that she had found wings, and meant to use them. I can show you
      a beautiful picture in my Italian diary: Miss Honeychurch as a kite, Miss
      Bartlett holding the string. Picture number two: the string breaks.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The sketch was in his diary, but it had been made afterwards, when he
      viewed things artistically. At the time he had given surreptitious tugs to
      the string himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But the string never broke?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No. I mightn&rsquo;t have seen Miss Honeychurch rise, but I should certainly
      have heard Miss Bartlett fall.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It has broken now,&rdquo; said the young man in low, vibrating tones.
    </p>
    <p>
      Immediately he realized that of all the conceited, ludicrous, contemptible
      ways of announcing an engagement this was the worst. He cursed his love of
      metaphor; had he suggested that he was a star and that Lucy was soaring up
      to reach him?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Broken? What do you mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I meant,&rdquo; said Cecil stiffly, &ldquo;that she is going to marry me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The clergyman was conscious of some bitter disappointment which he could
      not keep out of his voice.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am sorry; I must apologize. I had no idea you were intimate with her,
      or I should never have talked in this flippant, superficial way. Mr. Vyse,
      you ought to have stopped me.&rdquo; And down the garden he saw Lucy herself;
      yes, he was disappointed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil, who naturally preferred congratulations to apologies, drew down his
      mouth at the corners. Was this the reception his action would get from the
      world? Of course, he despised the world as a whole; every thoughtful man
      should; it is almost a test of refinement. But he was sensitive to the
      successive particles of it which he encountered.
    </p>
    <p>
      Occasionally he could be quite crude.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am sorry I have given you a shock,&rdquo; he said dryly. &ldquo;I fear that Lucy&rsquo;s
      choice does not meet with your approval.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not that. But you ought to have stopped me. I know Miss Honeychurch only
      a little as time goes. Perhaps I oughtn&rsquo;t to have discussed her so freely
      with any one; certainly not with you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are conscious of having said something indiscreet?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe pulled himself together. Really, Mr. Vyse had the art of placing
      one in the most tiresome positions. He was driven to use the prerogatives
      of his profession.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I have said nothing indiscreet. I foresaw at Florence that her quiet,
      uneventful childhood must end, and it has ended. I realized dimly enough
      that she might take some momentous step. She has taken it. She has learnt&mdash;you
      will let me talk freely, as I have begun freely&mdash;she has learnt what
      it is to love: the greatest lesson, some people will tell you, that our
      earthly life provides.&rdquo; It was now time for him to wave his hat at the
      approaching trio. He did not omit to do so. &ldquo;She has learnt through you,&rdquo;
       and if his voice was still clerical, it was now also sincere; &ldquo;let it be
      your care that her knowledge is profitable to her.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Grazie tante!&rdquo; said Cecil, who did not like parsons.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have you heard?&rdquo; shouted Mrs. Honeychurch as she toiled up the sloping
      garden. &ldquo;Oh, Mr. Beebe, have you heard the news?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Freddy, now full of geniality, whistled the wedding march. Youth seldom
      criticizes the accomplished fact.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Indeed I have!&rdquo; he cried. He looked at Lucy. In her presence he could not
      act the parson any longer&mdash;at all events not without apology. &ldquo;Mrs.
      Honeychurch, I&rsquo;m going to do what I am always supposed to do, but
      generally I&rsquo;m too shy. I want to invoke every kind of blessing on them,
      grave and gay, great and small. I want them all their lives to be
      supremely good and supremely happy as husband and wife, as father and
      mother. And now I want my tea.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You only asked for it just in time,&rdquo; the lady retorted. &ldquo;How dare you be
      serious at Windy Corner?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He took his tone from her. There was no more heavy beneficence, no more
      attempts to dignify the situation with poetry or the Scriptures. None of
      them dared or was able to be serious any more.
    </p>
    <p>
      An engagement is so potent a thing that sooner or later it reduces all who
      speak of it to this state of cheerful awe. Away from it, in the solitude
      of their rooms, Mr. Beebe, and even Freddy, might again be critical. But
      in its presence and in the presence of each other they were sincerely
      hilarious. It has a strange power, for it compels not only the lips, but
      the very heart. The chief parallel to compare one great thing with another&mdash;is
      the power over us of a temple of some alien creed. Standing outside, we
      deride or oppose it, or at the most feel sentimental. Inside, though the
      saints and gods are not ours, we become true believers, in case any true
      believer should be present.
    </p>
    <p>
      So it was that after the gropings and the misgivings of the afternoon they
      pulled themselves together and settled down to a very pleasant tea-party.
      If they were hypocrites they did not know it, and their hypocrisy had
      every chance of setting and of becoming true. Anne, putting down each
      plate as if it were a wedding present, stimulated them greatly. They could
      not lag behind that smile of hers which she gave them ere she kicked the
      drawing-room door. Mr. Beebe chirruped. Freddy was at his wittiest,
      referring to Cecil as the &ldquo;Fiasco&rdquo;&mdash;family honoured pun on fiance.
      Mrs. Honeychurch, amusing and portly, promised well as a mother-in-law. As
      for Lucy and Cecil, for whom the temple had been built, they also joined
      in the merry ritual, but waited, as earnest worshippers should, for the
      disclosure of some holier shrine of joy.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
