<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6: The Reverend Arthur Beebe, the Reverend Cuthbert Eager, Mr. Emerson, Mr. George Emerson, Miss Eleanor Lavish, Miss Charlotte Bartlett, and Miss Lucy Honeychurch Drive Out in Carriages to See a View; Italians Drive Them</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1-6" epub:type="chapter">
   <h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span><span epub:type="subtitle">The Reverend Arthur Beebe, the Reverend Cuthbert Eager, Mr. Emerson, Mr. George Emerson, Miss Eleanor Lavish, Miss Charlotte Bartlett, and Miss Lucy Honeychurch Drive Out in Carriages to See a View; Italians Drive Them</span></h3>

    <p>
      It was Phaethon who drove them to Fiesole that memorable day, a youth all
      irresponsibility and fire, recklessly urging his master&rsquo;s horses up the
      stony hill. Mr. Beebe recognized him at once. Neither the Ages of Faith
      nor the Age of Doubt had touched him; he was Phaethon in Tuscany driving a
      cab. And it was Persephone whom he asked leave to pick up on the way,
      saying that she was his sister&mdash;Persephone, tall and slender and
      pale, returning with the Spring to her mother&rsquo;s cottage, and still shading
      her eyes from the unaccustomed light. To her Mr. Eager objected, saying
      that here was the thin edge of the wedge, and one must guard against
      imposition. But the ladies interceded, and when it had been made clear
      that it was a very great favour, the goddess was allowed to mount beside
      the god.
    </p>
    <p>
      Phaethon at once slipped the left rein over her head, thus enabling
      himself to drive with his arm round her waist. She did not mind. Mr.
      Eager, who sat with his back to the horses, saw nothing of the indecorous
      proceeding, and continued his conversation with Lucy. The other two
      occupants of the carriage were old Mr. Emerson and Miss Lavish. For a
      dreadful thing had happened: Mr. Beebe, without consulting Mr. Eager, had
      doubled the size of the party. And though Miss Bartlett and Miss Lavish
      had planned all the morning how the people were to sit, at the critical
      moment when the carriages came round they lost their heads, and Miss
      Lavish got in with Lucy, while Miss Bartlett, with George Emerson and Mr.
      Beebe, followed on behind.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was hard on the poor chaplain to have his partie carree thus
      transformed. Tea at a Renaissance villa, if he had ever meditated it, was
      now impossible. Lucy and Miss Bartlett had a certain style about them, and
      Mr. Beebe, though unreliable, was a man of parts. But a shoddy lady writer
      and a journalist who had murdered his wife in the sight of God&mdash;they
      should enter no villa at his introduction.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy, elegantly dressed in white, sat erect and nervous amid these
      explosive ingredients, attentive to Mr. Eager, repressive towards Miss
      Lavish, watchful of old Mr. Emerson, hitherto fortunately asleep, thanks
      to a heavy lunch and the drowsy atmosphere of Spring. She looked on the
      expedition as the work of Fate. But for it she would have avoided George
      Emerson successfully. In an open manner he had shown that he wished to
      continue their intimacy. She had refused, not because she disliked him,
      but because she did not know what had happened, and suspected that he did
      know. And this frightened her.
    </p>
    <p>
      For the real event&mdash;whatever it was&mdash;had taken place, not in the
      Loggia, but by the river. To behave wildly at the sight of death is
      pardonable. But to discuss it afterwards, to pass from discussion into
      silence, and through silence into sympathy, that is an error, not of a
      startled emotion, but of the whole fabric. There was really something
      blameworthy (she thought) in their joint contemplation of the shadowy
      stream, in the common impulse which had turned them to the house without
      the passing of a look or word. This sense of wickedness had been slight at
      first. She had nearly joined the party to the Torre del Gallo. But each
      time that she avoided George it became more imperative that she should
      avoid him again. And now celestial irony, working through her cousin and
      two clergymen, did not suffer her to leave Florence till she had made this
      expedition with him through the hills.
    </p>
    <p>
      Meanwhile Mr. Eager held her in civil converse; their little tiff was
      over.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So, Miss Honeychurch, you are travelling? As a student of art?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, dear me, no&mdash;oh, no!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps as a student of human nature,&rdquo; interposed Miss Lavish, &ldquo;like
      myself?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, no. I am here as a tourist.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, indeed,&rdquo; said Mr. Eager. &ldquo;Are you indeed? If you will not think me
      rude, we residents sometimes pity you poor tourists not a little&mdash;handed
      about like a parcel of goods from Venice to Florence, from Florence to
      Rome, living herded together in pensions or hotels, quite unconscious of
      anything that is outside Baedeker, their one anxiety to get &lsquo;done&rsquo; or
      &lsquo;through&rsquo; and go on somewhere else. The result is, they mix up towns,
      rivers, palaces in one inextricable whirl. You know the American girl in
      Punch who says: &lsquo;Say, poppa, what did we see at Rome?&rsquo; And the father
      replies: &lsquo;Why, guess Rome was the place where we saw the yaller dog.&rsquo;
      There&rsquo;s travelling for you. Ha! ha! ha!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I quite agree,&rdquo; said Miss Lavish, who had several times tried to
      interrupt his mordant wit. &ldquo;The narrowness and superficiality of the
      Anglo-Saxon tourist is nothing less than a menace.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Quite so. Now, the English colony at Florence, Miss Honeychurch&mdash;and
      it is of considerable size, though, of course, not all equally&mdash;a few
      are here for trade, for example. But the greater part are students. Lady
      Helen Laverstock is at present busy over Fra Angelico. I mention her name
      because we are passing her villa on the left. No, you can only see it if
      you stand&mdash;no, do not stand; you will fall. She is very proud of that
      thick hedge. Inside, perfect seclusion. One might have gone back six
      hundred years. Some critics believe that her garden was the scene of The
      Decameron, which lends it an additional interest, does it not?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It does indeed!&rdquo; cried Miss Lavish. &ldquo;Tell me, where do they place the
      scene of that wonderful seventh day?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But Mr. Eager proceeded to tell Miss Honeychurch that on the right lived
      Mr. Someone Something, an American of the best type&mdash;so rare!&mdash;and
      that the Somebody Elses were farther down the hill. &ldquo;Doubtless you know
      her monographs in the series of &lsquo;Mediaeval Byways&rsquo;? He is working at
      Gemistus Pletho. Sometimes as I take tea in their beautiful grounds I
      hear, over the wall, the electric tram squealing up the new road with its
      loads of hot, dusty, unintelligent tourists who are going to &lsquo;do&rsquo; Fiesole
      in an hour in order that they may say they have been there, and I think&mdash;think&mdash;I
      think how little they think what lies so near them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      During this speech the two figures on the box were sporting with each
      other disgracefully. Lucy had a spasm of envy. Granted that they wished to
      misbehave, it was pleasant for them to be able to do so. They were
      probably the only people enjoying the expedition. The carriage swept with
      agonizing jolts up through the Piazza of Fiesole and into the Settignano
      road.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Piano! piano!&rdquo; said Mr. Eager, elegantly waving his hand over his head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Va bene, signore, va bene, va bene,&rdquo; crooned the driver, and whipped his
      horses up again.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now Mr. Eager and Miss Lavish began to talk against each other on the
      subject of Alessio Baldovinetti. Was he a cause of the Renaissance, or was
      he one of its manifestations? The other carriage was left behind. As the
      pace increased to a gallop the large, slumbering form of Mr. Emerson was
      thrown against the chaplain with the regularity of a machine.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Piano! piano!&rdquo; said he, with a martyred look at Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      An extra lurch made him turn angrily in his seat. Phaethon, who for some
      time had been endeavouring to kiss Persephone, had just succeeded.
    </p>
    <p>
      A little scene ensued, which, as Miss Bartlett said afterwards, was most
      unpleasant. The horses were stopped, the lovers were ordered to
      disentangle themselves, the boy was to lose his pourboire, the girl was
      immediately to get down.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She is my sister,&rdquo; said he, turning round on them with piteous eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Eager took the trouble to tell him that he was a liar.
    </p>
    <p>
      Phaethon hung down his head, not at the matter of the accusation, but at
      its manner. At this point Mr. Emerson, whom the shock of stopping had
      awoke, declared that the lovers must on no account be separated, and
      patted them on the back to signify his approval. And Miss Lavish, though
      unwilling to ally him, felt bound to support the cause of Bohemianism.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Most certainly I would let them be,&rdquo; she cried. &ldquo;But I dare say I shall
      receive scant support. I have always flown in the face of the conventions
      all my life. This is what I call an adventure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We must not submit,&rdquo; said Mr. Eager. &ldquo;I knew he was trying it on. He is
      treating us as if we were a party of Cook&rsquo;s tourists.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Surely no!&rdquo; said Miss Lavish, her ardour visibly decreasing.
    </p>
    <p>
      The other carriage had drawn up behind, and sensible Mr. Beebe called out
      that after this warning the couple would be sure to behave themselves
      properly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Leave them alone,&rdquo; Mr. Emerson begged the chaplain, of whom he stood in
      no awe. &ldquo;Do we find happiness so often that we should turn it off the box
      when it happens to sit there? To be driven by lovers&mdash;A king might
      envy us, and if we part them it&rsquo;s more like sacrilege than anything I
      know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Here the voice of Miss Bartlett was heard saying that a crowd had begun to
      collect.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Eager, who suffered from an over-fluent tongue rather than a resolute
      will, was determined to make himself heard. He addressed the driver again.
      Italian in the mouth of Italians is a deep-voiced stream, with unexpected
      cataracts and boulders to preserve it from monotony. In Mr. Eager&rsquo;s mouth
      it resembled nothing so much as an acid whistling fountain which played
      ever higher and higher, and quicker and quicker, and more and more
      shrilly, till abruptly it was turned off with a click.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Signorina!&rdquo; said the man to Lucy, when the display had ceased. Why should
      he appeal to Lucy?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Signorina!&rdquo; echoed Persephone in her glorious contralto. She pointed at
      the other carriage. Why?
    </p>
    <p>
      For a moment the two girls looked at each other. Then Persephone got down
      from the box.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Victory at last!&rdquo; said Mr. Eager, smiting his hands together as the
      carriages started again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is not victory,&rdquo; said Mr. Emerson. &ldquo;It is defeat. You have parted two
      people who were happy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Eager shut his eyes. He was obliged to sit next to Mr. Emerson, but he
      would not speak to him. The old man was refreshed by sleep, and took up
      the matter warmly. He commanded Lucy to agree with him; he shouted for
      support to his son.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We have tried to buy what cannot be bought with money. He has bargained
      to drive us, and he is doing it. We have no rights over his soul.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Lavish frowned. It is hard when a person you have classed as
      typically British speaks out of his character.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He was not driving us well,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;He jolted us.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That I deny. It was as restful as sleeping. Aha! he is jolting us now.
      Can you wonder? He would like to throw us out, and most certainly he is
      justified. And if I were superstitious I&rsquo;d be frightened of the girl, too.
      It doesn&rsquo;t do to injure young people. Have you ever heard of Lorenzo de
      Medici?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Lavish bristled.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Most certainly I have. Do you refer to Lorenzo il Magnifico, or to
      Lorenzo, Duke of Urbino, or to Lorenzo surnamed Lorenzino on account of
      his diminutive stature?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Lord knows. Possibly he does know, for I refer to Lorenzo the poet.
      He wrote a line&mdash;so I heard yesterday&mdash;which runs like this:
      &lsquo;Don&rsquo;t go fighting against the Spring.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Eager could not resist the opportunity for erudition.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Non fate guerra al Maggio,&rdquo; he murmured. &ldquo;&lsquo;War not with the May&rsquo; would
      render a correct meaning.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The point is, we have warred with it. Look.&rdquo; He pointed to the Val
      d&rsquo;Arno, which was visible far below them, through the budding trees.
      &ldquo;Fifty miles of Spring, and we&rsquo;ve come up to admire them. Do you suppose
      there&rsquo;s any difference between Spring in nature and Spring in man? But
      there we go, praising the one and condemning the other as improper,
      ashamed that the same laws work eternally through both.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      No one encouraged him to talk. Presently Mr. Eager gave a signal for the
      carriages to stop and marshalled the party for their ramble on the hill. A
      hollow like a great amphitheatre, full of terraced steps and misty olives,
      now lay between them and the heights of Fiesole, and the road, still
      following its curve, was about to sweep on to a promontory which stood out
      in the plain. It was this promontory, uncultivated, wet, covered with
      bushes and occasional trees, which had caught the fancy of Alessio
      Baldovinetti nearly five hundred years before. He had ascended it, that
      diligent and rather obscure master, possibly with an eye to business,
      possibly for the joy of ascending. Standing there, he had seen that view
      of the Val d&rsquo;Arno and distant Florence, which he afterwards had introduced
      not very effectively into his work. But where exactly had he stood? That
      was the question which Mr. Eager hoped to solve now. And Miss Lavish,
      whose nature was attracted by anything problematical, had become equally
      enthusiastic.
    </p>
    <p>
      But it is not easy to carry the pictures of Alessio Baldovinetti in your
      head, even if you have remembered to look at them before starting. And the
      haze in the valley increased the difficulty of the quest.
    </p>
    <p>
      The party sprang about from tuft to tuft of grass, their anxiety to keep
      together being only equalled by their desire to go different directions.
      Finally they split into groups. Lucy clung to Miss Bartlett and Miss
      Lavish; the Emersons returned to hold laborious converse with the drivers;
      while the two clergymen, who were expected to have topics in common, were
      left to each other.
    </p>
    <p>
      The two elder ladies soon threw off the mask. In the audible whisper that
      was now so familiar to Lucy they began to discuss, not Alessio
      Baldovinetti, but the drive. Miss Bartlett had asked Mr. George Emerson
      what his profession was, and he had answered &ldquo;the railway.&rdquo; She was very
      sorry that she had asked him. She had no idea that it would be such a
      dreadful answer, or she would not have asked him. Mr. Beebe had turned the
      conversation so cleverly, and she hoped that the young man was not very
      much hurt at her asking him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The railway!&rdquo; gasped Miss Lavish. &ldquo;Oh, but I shall die! Of course it was
      the railway!&rdquo; She could not control her mirth. &ldquo;He is the image of a
      porter&mdash;on, on the South-Eastern.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eleanor, be quiet,&rdquo; plucking at her vivacious companion. &ldquo;Hush! They&rsquo;ll
      hear&mdash;the Emersons&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t stop. Let me go my wicked way. A porter&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eleanor!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure it&rsquo;s all right,&rdquo; put in Lucy. &ldquo;The Emersons won&rsquo;t hear, and they
      wouldn&rsquo;t mind if they did.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Lavish did not seem pleased at this.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Honeychurch listening!&rdquo; she said rather crossly. &ldquo;Pouf! Wouf! You
      naughty girl! Go away!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Lucy, you ought to be with Mr. Eager, I&rsquo;m sure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t find them now, and I don&rsquo;t want to either.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Eager will be offended. It is your party.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Please, I&rsquo;d rather stop here with you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I agree,&rdquo; said Miss Lavish. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s like a school feast; the boys have
      got separated from the girls. Miss Lucy, you are to go. We wish to
      converse on high topics unsuited for your ear.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The girl was stubborn. As her time at Florence drew to its close she was
      only at ease amongst those to whom she felt indifferent. Such a one was
      Miss Lavish, and such for the moment was Charlotte. She wished she had not
      called attention to herself; they were both annoyed at her remark and
      seemed determined to get rid of her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How tired one gets,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett. &ldquo;Oh, I do wish Freddy and your
      mother could be here.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Unselfishness with Miss Bartlett had entirely usurped the functions of
      enthusiasm. Lucy did not look at the view either. She would not enjoy
      anything till she was safe at Rome.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then sit you down,&rdquo; said Miss Lavish. &ldquo;Observe my foresight.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      With many a smile she produced two of those mackintosh squares that
      protect the frame of the tourist from damp grass or cold marble steps. She
      sat on one; who was to sit on the other?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy; without a moment&rsquo;s doubt, Lucy. The ground will do for me. Really I
      have not had rheumatism for years. If I do feel it coming on I shall
      stand. Imagine your mother&rsquo;s feelings if I let you sit in the wet in your
      white linen.&rdquo; She sat down heavily where the ground looked particularly
      moist. &ldquo;Here we are, all settled delightfully. Even if my dress is thinner
      it will not show so much, being brown. Sit down, dear; you are too
      unselfish; you don&rsquo;t assert yourself enough.&rdquo; She cleared her throat. &ldquo;Now
      don&rsquo;t be alarmed; this isn&rsquo;t a cold. It&rsquo;s the tiniest cough, and I have
      had it three days. It&rsquo;s nothing to do with sitting here at all.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was only one way of treating the situation. At the end of five
      minutes Lucy departed in search of Mr. Beebe and Mr. Eager, vanquished by
      the mackintosh square.
    </p>
    <p>
      She addressed herself to the drivers, who were sprawling in the carriages,
      perfuming the cushions with cigars. The miscreant, a bony young man
      scorched black by the sun, rose to greet her with the courtesy of a host
      and the assurance of a relative.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dove?&rdquo; said Lucy, after much anxious thought.
    </p>
    <p>
      His face lit up. Of course he knew where. Not so far either. His arm swept
      three-fourths of the horizon. He should just think he did know where. He
      pressed his finger-tips to his forehead and then pushed them towards her,
      as if oozing with visible extract of knowledge.
    </p>
    <p>
      More seemed necessary. What was the Italian for &ldquo;clergyman&rdquo;?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dove buoni uomini?&rdquo; said she at last.
    </p>
    <p>
      Good? Scarcely the adjective for those noble beings! He showed her his
      cigar.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Uno&mdash;piu&mdash;piccolo,&rdquo; was her next remark, implying &ldquo;Has the
      cigar been given to you by Mr. Beebe, the smaller of the two good men?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She was correct as usual. He tied the horse to a tree, kicked it to make
      it stay quiet, dusted the carriage, arranged his hair, remoulded his hat,
      encouraged his moustache, and in rather less than a quarter of a minute
      was ready to conduct her. Italians are born knowing the way. It would seem
      that the whole earth lay before them, not as a map, but as a chess-board,
      whereon they continually behold the changing pieces as well as the
      squares. Any one can find places, but the finding of people is a gift from
      God.
    </p>
    <p>
      He only stopped once, to pick her some great blue violets. She thanked him
      with real pleasure. In the company of this common man the world was
      beautiful and direct. For the first time she felt the influence of Spring.
      His arm swept the horizon gracefully; violets, like other things, existed
      in great profusion there; &ldquo;would she like to see them?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ma buoni uomini.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He bowed. Certainly. Good men first, violets afterwards. They proceeded
      briskly through the undergrowth, which became thicker and thicker. They
      were nearing the edge of the promontory, and the view was stealing round
      them, but the brown network of the bushes shattered it into countless
      pieces. He was occupied in his cigar, and in holding back the pliant
      boughs. She was rejoicing in her escape from dullness. Not a step, not a
      twig, was unimportant to her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a voice in the wood, in the distance behind them. The voice of
      Mr. Eager? He shrugged his shoulders. An Italian&rsquo;s ignorance is sometimes
      more remarkable than his knowledge. She could not make him understand that
      perhaps they had missed the clergymen. The view was forming at last; she
      could discern the river, the golden plain, other hills.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eccolo!&rdquo; he exclaimed.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the same moment the ground gave way, and with a cry she fell out of the
      wood. Light and beauty enveloped her. She had fallen on to a little open
      terrace, which was covered with violets from end to end.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Courage!&rdquo; cried her companion, now standing some six feet above. &ldquo;Courage
      and love.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She did not answer. From her feet the ground sloped sharply into view, and
      violets ran down in rivulets and streams and cataracts, irrigating the
      hillside with blue, eddying round the tree stems collecting into pools in
      the hollows, covering the grass with spots of azure foam. But never again
      were they in such profusion; this terrace was the well-head, the primal
      source whence beauty gushed out to water the earth.
    </p>
    <p>
      Standing at its brink, like a swimmer who prepares, was the good man. But
      he was not the good man that she had expected, and he was alone.
    </p>
    <p>
      George had turned at the sound of her arrival. For a moment he
      contemplated her, as one who had fallen out of heaven. He saw radiant joy
      in her face, he saw the flowers beat against her dress in blue waves. The
      bushes above them closed. He stepped quickly forward and kissed her.
    </p>
    <p>
      Before she could speak, almost before she could feel, a voice called,
      &ldquo;Lucy! Lucy! Lucy!&rdquo; The silence of life had been broken by Miss Bartlett
      who stood brown against the view.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
