<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9: Lucy as a Work of Art</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
    <h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span><span epub:type="subtitle">Lucy as a Work of Art</span></h3>
    <p>
      A few days after the engagement was announced Mrs. Honeychurch made Lucy
      and her Fiasco come to a little garden-party in the neighbourhood, for
      naturally she wanted to show people that her daughter was marrying a
      presentable man.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil was more than presentable; he looked distinguished, and it was very
      pleasant to see his slim figure keeping step with Lucy, and his long, fair
      face responding when Lucy spoke to him. People congratulated Mrs.
      Honeychurch, which is, I believe, a social blunder, but it pleased her,
      and she introduced Cecil rather indiscriminately to some stuffy dowagers.
    </p>
    <p>
      At tea a misfortune took place: a cup of coffee was upset over Lucy&rsquo;s
      figured silk, and though Lucy feigned indifference, her mother feigned
      nothing of the sort but dragged her indoors to have the frock treated by a
      sympathetic maid. They were gone some time, and Cecil was left with the
      dowagers. When they returned he was not as pleasant as he had been.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you go to much of this sort of thing?&rdquo; he asked when they were driving
      home.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, now and then,&rdquo; said Lucy, who had rather enjoyed herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is it typical of country society?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suppose so. Mother, would it be?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Plenty of society,&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch, who was trying to remember the
      hang of one of the dresses.
    </p>
    <p>
      Seeing that her thoughts were elsewhere, Cecil bent towards Lucy and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To me it seemed perfectly appalling, disastrous, portentous.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am so sorry that you were stranded.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not that, but the congratulations. It is so disgusting, the way an
      engagement is regarded as public property&mdash;a kind of waste place
      where every outsider may shoot his vulgar sentiment. All those old women
      smirking!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;One has to go through it, I suppose. They won&rsquo;t notice us so much next
      time.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But my point is that their whole attitude is wrong. An engagement&mdash;horrid
      word in the first place&mdash;is a private matter, and should be treated
      as such.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Yet the smirking old women, however wrong individually, were racially
      correct. The spirit of the generations had smiled through them, rejoicing
      in the engagement of Cecil and Lucy because it promised the continuance of
      life on earth. To Cecil and Lucy it promised something quite different&mdash;personal
      love. Hence Cecil&rsquo;s irritation and Lucy&rsquo;s belief that his irritation was
      just.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How tiresome!&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Couldn&rsquo;t you have escaped to tennis?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t play tennis&mdash;at least, not in public. The neighbourhood is
      deprived of the romance of me being athletic. Such romance as I have is
      that of the Inglese Italianato.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Inglese Italianato?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;E un diavolo incarnato! You know the proverb?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She did not. Nor did it seem applicable to a young man who had spent a
      quiet winter in Rome with his mother. But Cecil, since his engagement, had
      taken to affect a cosmopolitan naughtiness which he was far from
      possessing.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;I cannot help it if they do disapprove of me. There are
      certain irremovable barriers between myself and them, and I must accept
      them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We all have our limitations, I suppose,&rdquo; said wise Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sometimes they are forced on us, though,&rdquo; said Cecil, who saw from her
      remark that she did not quite understand his position.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It makes a difference doesn&rsquo;t it, whether we fully fence ourselves in, or
      whether we are fenced out by the barriers of others?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She thought a moment, and agreed that it did make a difference.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Difference?&rdquo; cried Mrs. Honeychurch, suddenly alert. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t see any
      difference. Fences are fences, especially when they are in the same
      place.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We were speaking of motives,&rdquo; said Cecil, on whom the interruption
      jarred.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear Cecil, look here.&rdquo; She spread out her knees and perched her
      card-case on her lap. &ldquo;This is me. That&rsquo;s Windy Corner. The rest of the
      pattern is the other people. Motives are all very well, but the fence
      comes here.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We weren&rsquo;t talking of real fences,&rdquo; said Lucy, laughing.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, I see, dear&mdash;poetry.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She leant placidly back. Cecil wondered why Lucy had been amused.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I tell you who has no &lsquo;fences,&rsquo; as you call them,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;and that&rsquo;s
      Mr. Beebe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A parson fenceless would mean a parson defenceless.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy was slow to follow what people said, but quick enough to detect what
      they meant. She missed Cecil&rsquo;s epigram, but grasped the feeling that
      prompted it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you like Mr. Beebe?&rdquo; she asked thoughtfully.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I never said so!&rdquo; he cried. &ldquo;I consider him far above the average. I only
      denied&mdash;&rdquo; And he swept off on the subject of fences again, and was
      brilliant.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now, a clergyman that I do hate,&rdquo; said she wanting to say something
      sympathetic, &ldquo;a clergyman that does have fences, and the most dreadful
      ones, is Mr. Eager, the English chaplain at Florence. He was truly
      insincere&mdash;not merely the manner unfortunate. He was a snob, and so
      conceited, and he did say such unkind things.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What sort of things?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There was an old man at the Bertolini whom he said had murdered his
      wife.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps he had.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why &lsquo;no&rsquo;?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He was such a nice old man, I&rsquo;m sure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil laughed at her feminine inconsequence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I did try to sift the thing. Mr. Eager would never come to the
      point. He prefers it vague&mdash;said the old man had &lsquo;practically&rsquo;
      murdered his wife&mdash;had murdered her in the sight of God.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hush, dear!&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch absently.
</p>
    <p>
&ldquo;But isn&rsquo;t it intolerable
      that a person whom we&rsquo;re told to imitate should go round spreading
      slander? It was, I believe, chiefly owing to him that the old man was
      dropped. People pretended he was vulgar, but he certainly wasn&rsquo;t that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Poor old man! What was his name?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Harris,&rdquo; said Lucy glibly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s hope that Mrs. Harris there warn&rsquo;t no sich person,&rdquo; said her
      mother.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil nodded intelligently.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t Mr. Eager a parson of the cultured type?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know. I hate him. I&rsquo;ve heard him lecture on Giotto. I hate him.
      Nothing can hide a petty nature. I HATE him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My goodness gracious me, child!&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch. &ldquo;You&rsquo;ll blow my
      head off! Whatever is there to shout over? I forbid you and Cecil to hate
      any more clergymen.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He smiled. There was indeed something rather incongruous in Lucy&rsquo;s moral
      outburst over Mr. Eager. It was as if one should see the Leonardo on the
      ceiling of the Sistine. He longed to hint to her that not here lay her
      vocation; that a woman&rsquo;s power and charm reside in mystery, not in
      muscular rant. But possibly rant is a sign of vitality: it mars the
      beautiful creature, but shows that she is alive. After a moment, he
      contemplated her flushed face and excited gestures with a certain
      approval. He forebore to repress the sources of youth.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nature&mdash;simplest of topics, he thought&mdash;lay around them. He
      praised the pine-woods, the deep lasts of bracken, the crimson leaves that
      spotted the hurt-bushes, the serviceable beauty of the turnpike road. The
      outdoor world was not very familiar to him, and occasionally he went wrong
      in a question of fact. Mrs. Honeychurch&rsquo;s mouth twitched when he spoke of
      the perpetual green of the larch.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I count myself a lucky person,&rdquo; he concluded, &ldquo;When I&rsquo;m in London I feel
      I could never live out of it. When I&rsquo;m in the country I feel the same
      about the country. After all, I do believe that birds and trees and the
      sky are the most wonderful things in life, and that the people who live
      amongst them must be the best. It&rsquo;s true that in nine cases out of ten
      they don&rsquo;t seem to notice anything. The country gentleman and the country
      labourer are each in their way the most depressing of companions. Yet they
      may have a tacit sympathy with the workings of Nature which is denied to
      us of the town. Do you feel that, Mrs. Honeychurch?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Honeychurch started and smiled. She had not been attending. Cecil,
      who was rather crushed on the front seat of the victoria, felt irritable,
      and determined not to say anything interesting again.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy had not attended either. Her brow was wrinkled, and she still looked
      furiously cross&mdash;the result, he concluded, of too much moral
      gymnastics. It was sad to see her thus blind to the beauties of an August
      wood.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Come down, O maid, from yonder mountain height,&rsquo;&rdquo; he quoted, and touched
      her knee with his own.
    </p>
    <p>
      She flushed again and said: &ldquo;What height?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Come down, O maid, from yonder mountain height, What pleasure lives in
      height (the shepherd sang). In height and in the splendour of the hills?&rsquo;
      Let us take Mrs. Honeychurch&rsquo;s advice and hate clergymen no more. What&rsquo;s
      this place?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Summer Street, of course,&rdquo; said Lucy, and roused herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      The woods had opened to leave space for a sloping triangular meadow.
      Pretty cottages lined it on two sides, and the upper and third side was
      occupied by a new stone church, expensively simple, a charming shingled
      spire. Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s house was near the church. In height it scarcely
      exceeded the cottages. Some great mansions were at hand, but they were
      hidden in the trees. The scene suggested a Swiss Alp rather than the
      shrine and centre of a leisured world, and was marred only by two ugly
      little villas&mdash;the villas that had competed with Cecil&rsquo;s engagement,
      having been acquired by Sir Harry Otway the very afternoon that Lucy had
      been acquired by Cecil.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cissie&rdquo; was the name of one of these villas, &ldquo;Albert&rdquo; of the other. These
      titles were not only picked out in shaded Gothic on the garden gates, but
      appeared a second time on the porches, where they followed the
      semicircular curve of the entrance arch in block capitals. &ldquo;Albert&rdquo; was
      inhabited. His tortured garden was bright with geraniums and lobelias and
      polished shells. His little windows were chastely swathed in Nottingham
      lace. &ldquo;Cissie&rdquo; was to let. Three notice-boards, belonging to Dorking
      agents, lolled on her fence and announced the not surprising fact. Her
      paths were already weedy; her pocket-handkerchief of a lawn was yellow
      with dandelions.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The place is ruined!&rdquo; said the ladies mechanically. &ldquo;Summer Street will
      never be the same again.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      As the carriage passed, &ldquo;Cissie&rsquo;s&rdquo; door opened, and a gentleman came out
      of her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Stop!&rdquo; cried Mrs. Honeychurch, touching the coachman with her parasol.
      &ldquo;Here&rsquo;s Sir Harry. Now we shall know. Sir Harry, pull those things down at
      once!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Sir Harry Otway&mdash;who need not be described&mdash;came to the carriage
      and said &ldquo;Mrs. Honeychurch, I meant to. I can&rsquo;t, I really can&rsquo;t turn out
      Miss Flack.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Am I not always right? She ought to have gone before the contract was
      signed. Does she still live rent free, as she did in her nephew&rsquo;s time?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But what can I do?&rdquo; He lowered his voice. &ldquo;An old lady, so very vulgar,
      and almost bedridden.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Turn her out,&rdquo; said Cecil bravely.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sir Harry sighed, and looked at the villas mournfully. He had had full
      warning of Mr. Flack&rsquo;s intentions, and might have bought the plot before
      building commenced: but he was apathetic and dilatory. He had known Summer
      Street for so many years that he could not imagine it being spoilt. Not
      till Mrs. Flack had laid the foundation stone, and the apparition of red
      and cream brick began to rise did he take alarm. He called on Mr. Flack,
      the local builder,&mdash;a most reasonable and respectful man&mdash;who
      agreed that tiles would have made more artistic roof, but pointed out that
      slates were cheaper. He ventured to differ, however, about the Corinthian
      columns which were to cling like leeches to the frames of the bow windows,
      saying that, for his part, he liked to relieve the facade by a bit of
      decoration. Sir Harry hinted that a column, if possible, should be
      structural as well as decorative.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Flack replied that all the columns had been ordered, adding, &ldquo;and all
      the capitals different&mdash;one with dragons in the foliage, another
      approaching to the Ionian style, another introducing Mrs. Flack&rsquo;s initials&mdash;every
      one different.&rdquo; For he had read his Ruskin. He built his villas according
      to his desire; and not until he had inserted an immovable aunt into one of
      them did Sir Harry buy.
    </p>
    <p>
      This futile and unprofitable transaction filled the knight with sadness as
      he leant on Mrs. Honeychurch&rsquo;s carriage. He had failed in his duties to
      the country-side, and the country-side was laughing at him as well. He had
      spent money, and yet Summer Street was spoilt as much as ever. All he
      could do now was to find a desirable tenant for &ldquo;Cissie&rdquo;&mdash;someone
      really desirable.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The rent is absurdly low,&rdquo; he told them, &ldquo;and perhaps I am an easy
      landlord. But it is such an awkward size. It is too large for the peasant
      class and too small for any one the least like ourselves.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil had been hesitating whether he should despise the villas or despise
      Sir Harry for despising them. The latter impulse seemed the more fruitful.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You ought to find a tenant at once,&rdquo; he said maliciously. &ldquo;It would be a
      perfect paradise for a bank clerk.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Exactly!&rdquo; said Sir Harry excitedly. &ldquo;That is exactly what I fear, Mr.
      Vyse. It will attract the wrong type of people. The train service has
      improved&mdash;a fatal improvement, to my mind. And what are five miles
      from a station in these days of bicycles?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Rather a strenuous clerk it would be,&rdquo; said Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil, who had his full share of mediaeval mischievousness, replied that
      the physique of the lower middle classes was improving at a most appalling
      rate. She saw that he was laughing at their harmless neighbour, and roused
      herself to stop him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sir Harry!&rdquo; she exclaimed, &ldquo;I have an idea. How would you like
      spinsters?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear Lucy, it would be splendid. Do you know any such?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes; I met them abroad.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Gentlewomen?&rdquo; he asked tentatively.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, indeed, and at the present moment homeless. I heard from them last
      week&mdash;Miss Teresa and Miss Catharine Alan. I&rsquo;m really not joking.
      They are quite the right people. Mr. Beebe knows them, too. May I tell
      them to write to you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Indeed you may!&rdquo; he cried. &ldquo;Here we are with the difficulty solved
      already. How delightful it is! Extra facilities&mdash;please tell them
      they shall have extra facilities, for I shall have no agents&rsquo; fees. Oh,
      the agents! The appalling people they have sent me! One woman, when I
      wrote&mdash;a tactful letter, you know&mdash;asking her to explain her
      social position to me, replied that she would pay the rent in advance. As
      if one cares about that! And several references I took up were most
      unsatisfactory&mdash;people swindlers, or not respectable. And oh, the
      deceit! I have seen a good deal of the seamy side this last week. The
      deceit of the most promising people. My dear Lucy, the deceit!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She nodded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My advice,&rdquo; put in Mrs. Honeychurch, &ldquo;is to have nothing to do with Lucy
      and her decayed gentlewomen at all. I know the type. Preserve me from
      people who have seen better days, and bring heirlooms with them that make
      the house smell stuffy. It&rsquo;s a sad thing, but I&rsquo;d far rather let to some
      one who is going up in the world than to someone who has come down.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think I follow you,&rdquo; said Sir Harry; &ldquo;but it is, as you say, a very sad
      thing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Misses Alan aren&rsquo;t that!&rdquo; cried Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, they are,&rdquo; said Cecil. &ldquo;I haven&rsquo;t met them but I should say they
      were a highly unsuitable addition to the neighbourhood.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t listen to him, Sir Harry&mdash;he&rsquo;s tiresome.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s I who am tiresome,&rdquo; he replied. &ldquo;I oughtn&rsquo;t to come with my troubles
      to young people. But really I am so worried, and Lady Otway will only say
      that I cannot be too careful, which is quite true, but no real help.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then may I write to my Misses Alan?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Please!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But his eye wavered when Mrs. Honeychurch exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Beware! They are certain to have canaries. Sir Harry, beware of canaries:
      they spit the seed out through the bars of the cages and then the mice
      come. Beware of women altogether. Only let to a man.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Really&mdash;&rdquo; he murmured gallantly, though he saw the wisdom of her
      remark.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Men don&rsquo;t gossip over tea-cups. If they get drunk, there&rsquo;s an end of them&mdash;they
      lie down comfortably and sleep it off. If they&rsquo;re vulgar, they somehow
      keep it to themselves. It doesn&rsquo;t spread so. Give me a man&mdash;of
      course, provided he&rsquo;s clean.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Sir Harry blushed. Neither he nor Cecil enjoyed these open compliments to
      their sex. Even the exclusion of the dirty did not leave them much
      distinction. He suggested that Mrs. Honeychurch, if she had time, should
      descend from the carriage and inspect &ldquo;Cissie&rdquo; for herself. She was
      delighted. Nature had intended her to be poor and to live in such a house.
      Domestic arrangements always attracted her, especially when they were on a
      small scale.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil pulled Lucy back as she followed her mother.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mrs. Honeychurch,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;what if we two walk home and leave you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Certainly!&rdquo; was her cordial reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sir Harry likewise seemed almost too glad to get rid of them. He beamed at
      them knowingly, said, &ldquo;Aha! young people, young people!&rdquo; and then hastened
      to unlock the house.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hopeless vulgarian!&rdquo; exclaimed Cecil, almost before they were out of
      earshot.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Cecil!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t help it. It would be wrong not to loathe that man.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He isn&rsquo;t clever, but really he is nice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, Lucy, he stands for all that is bad in country life. In London he
      would keep his place. He would belong to a brainless club, and his wife
      would give brainless dinner parties. But down here he acts the little god
      with his gentility, and his patronage, and his sham aesthetics, and every
      one&mdash;even your mother&mdash;is taken in.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All that you say is quite true,&rdquo; said Lucy, though she felt discouraged.
      &ldquo;I wonder whether&mdash;whether it matters so very much.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It matters supremely. Sir Harry is the essence of that garden-party. Oh,
      goodness, how cross I feel! How I do hope he&rsquo;ll get some vulgar tenant in
      that villa&mdash;some woman so really vulgar that he&rsquo;ll notice it.
      GENTLEFOLKS! Ugh! with his bald head and retreating chin! But let&rsquo;s forget
      him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      This Lucy was glad enough to do. If Cecil disliked Sir Harry Otway and Mr.
      Beebe, what guarantee was there that the people who really mattered to her
      would escape? For instance, Freddy. Freddy was neither clever, nor subtle,
      nor beautiful, and what prevented Cecil from saying, any minute, &ldquo;It would
      be wrong not to loathe Freddy&rdquo;? And what would she reply? Further than
      Freddy she did not go, but he gave her anxiety enough. She could only
      assure herself that Cecil had known Freddy some time, and that they had
      always got on pleasantly, except, perhaps, during the last few days, which
      was an accident, perhaps.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Which way shall we go?&rdquo; she asked him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nature&mdash;simplest of topics, she thought&mdash;was around them. Summer
      Street lay deep in the woods, and she had stopped where a footpath
      diverged from the highroad.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Are there two ways?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps the road is more sensible, as we&rsquo;re got up smart.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;d rather go through the wood,&rdquo; said Cecil, With that subdued irritation
      that she had noticed in him all the afternoon. &ldquo;Why is it, Lucy, that you
      always say the road? Do you know that you have never once been with me in
      the fields or the wood since we were engaged?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Haven&rsquo;t I? The wood, then,&rdquo; said Lucy, startled at his queerness, but
      pretty sure that he would explain later; it was not his habit to leave her
      in doubt as to his meaning.
    </p>
    <p>
      She led the way into the whispering pines, and sure enough he did explain
      before they had gone a dozen yards.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I had got an idea&mdash;I dare say wrongly&mdash;that you feel more at
      home with me in a room.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A room?&rdquo; she echoed, hopelessly bewildered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes. Or, at the most, in a garden, or on a road. Never in the real
      country like this.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Cecil, whatever do you mean? I have never felt anything of the sort.
      You talk as if I was a kind of poetess sort of person.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know that you aren&rsquo;t. I connect you with a view&mdash;a certain
      type of view. Why shouldn&rsquo;t you connect me with a room?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She reflected a moment, and then said, laughing:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you know that you&rsquo;re right? I do. I must be a poetess after all. When
      I think of you it&rsquo;s always as in a room. How funny!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      To her surprise, he seemed annoyed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A drawing-room, pray? With no view?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, with no view, I fancy. Why not?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;d rather,&rdquo; he said reproachfully, &ldquo;that you connected me with the open
      air.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She said again, &ldquo;Oh, Cecil, whatever do you mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      As no explanation was forthcoming, she shook off the subject as too
      difficult for a girl, and led him further into the wood, pausing every now
      and then at some particularly beautiful or familiar combination of the
      trees. She had known the wood between Summer Street and Windy Corner ever
      since she could walk alone; she had played at losing Freddy in it, when
      Freddy was a purple-faced baby; and though she had been to Italy, it had
      lost none of its charm.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently they came to a little clearing among the pines&mdash;another
      tiny green alp, solitary this time, and holding in its bosom a shallow
      pool.
    </p>
    <p>
      She exclaimed, &ldquo;The Sacred Lake!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why do you call it that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t remember why. I suppose it comes out of some book. It&rsquo;s only a
      puddle now, but you see that stream going through it? Well, a good deal of
      water comes down after heavy rains, and can&rsquo;t get away at once, and the
      pool becomes quite large and beautiful. Then Freddy used to bathe there.
      He is very fond of it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He meant, &ldquo;Are you fond of it?&rdquo; But she answered dreamily, &ldquo;I bathed here,
      too, till I was found out. Then there was a row.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At another time he might have been shocked, for he had depths of
      prudishness within him. But now? with his momentary cult of the fresh air,
      he was delighted at her admirable simplicity. He looked at her as she
      stood by the pool&rsquo;s edge. She was got up smart, as she phrased it, and she
      reminded him of some brilliant flower that has no leaves of its own, but
      blooms abruptly out of a world of green.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who found you out?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Charlotte,&rdquo; she murmured. &ldquo;She was stopping with us. Charlotte&mdash;Charlotte.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Poor girl!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She smiled gravely. A certain scheme, from which hitherto he had shrunk,
      now appeared practical.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I suppose we ought to be going,&rdquo; was her reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy, I want to ask something of you that I have never asked before.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At the serious note in his voice she stepped frankly and kindly towards
      him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What, Cecil?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hitherto never&mdash;not even that day on the lawn when you agreed to
      marry me&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He became self-conscious and kept glancing round to see if they were
      observed. His courage had gone.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Up to now I have never kissed you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She was as scarlet as if he had put the thing most indelicately.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;more you have,&rdquo; she stammered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then I ask you&mdash;may I now?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course, you may, Cecil. You might before. I can&rsquo;t run at you, you
      know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At that supreme moment he was conscious of nothing but absurdities. Her
      reply was inadequate. She gave such a business-like lift to her veil. As
      he approached her he found time to wish that he could recoil. As he
      touched her, his gold pince-nez became dislodged and was flattened between
      them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Such was the embrace. He considered, with truth, that it had been a
      failure. Passion should believe itself irresistible. It should forget
      civility and consideration and all the other curses of a refined nature.
      Above all, it should never ask for leave where there is a right of way.
      Why could he not do as any labourer or navvy&mdash;nay, as any young man
      behind the counter would have done? He recast the scene. Lucy was standing
      flowerlike by the water, he rushed up and took her in his arms; she
      rebuked him, permitted him and revered him ever after for his manliness.
      For he believed that women revere men for their manliness.
    </p>
    <p>
      They left the pool in silence, after this one salutation. He waited for
      her to make some remark which should show him her inmost thoughts. At last
      she spoke, and with fitting gravity.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Emerson was the name, not Harris.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What name?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The old man&rsquo;s.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What old man?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That old man I told you about. The one Mr. Eager was so unkind to.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He could not know that this was the most intimate conversation they had
      ever had.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
