<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 18: Lying to Mr. Beebe, Mrs. Honeychurch, Freddy, and the Servants</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
    <h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span><span epub:type="subtitle">Lying to Mr. Beebe, Mrs. Honeychurch, Freddy, and the Servants</span></h3>
    <p>
      Windy Corner lay, not on the summit of the ridge, but a few hundred feet
      down the southern slope, at the springing of one of the great buttresses
      that supported the hill. On either side of it was a shallow ravine, filled
      with ferns and pine-trees, and down the ravine on the left ran the highway
      into the Weald.
    </p>
    <p>
      Whenever Mr. Beebe crossed the ridge and caught sight of these noble
      dispositions of the earth, and, poised in the middle of them, Windy
      Corner,&mdash;he laughed. The situation was so glorious, the house so
      commonplace, not to say impertinent. The late Mr. Honeychurch had affected
      the cube, because it gave him the most accommodation for his money, and
      the only addition made by his widow had been a small turret, shaped like a
      rhinoceros&rsquo; horn, where she could sit in wet weather and watch the carts
      going up and down the road. So impertinent&mdash;and yet the house &ldquo;did,&rdquo;
       for it was the home of people who loved their surroundings honestly. Other
      houses in the neighborhood had been built by expensive architects, over
      others their inmates had fidgeted sedulously, yet all these suggested the
      accidental, the temporary; while Windy Corner seemed as inevitable as an
      ugliness of Nature&rsquo;s own creation. One might laugh at the house, but one
      never shuddered. Mr. Beebe was bicycling over this Monday afternoon with a
      piece of gossip. He had heard from the Miss Alans. These admirable ladies,
      since they could not go to Cissie Villa, had changed their plans. They
      were going to Greece instead.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Since Florence did my poor sister so much good,&rdquo; wrote Miss Catharine,
      &ldquo;we do not see why we should not try Athens this winter. Of course, Athens
      is a plunge, and the doctor has ordered her special digestive bread; but,
      after all, we can take that with us, and it is only getting first into a
      steamer and then into a train. But is there an English Church?&rdquo; And the
      letter went on to say: &ldquo;I do not expect we shall go any further than
      Athens, but if you knew of a really comfortable pension at Constantinople,
      we should be so grateful.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy would enjoy this letter, and the smile with which Mr. Beebe greeted
      Windy Corner was partly for her. She would see the fun of it, and some of
      its beauty, for she must see some beauty. Though she was hopeless about
      pictures, and though she dressed so unevenly&mdash;oh, that cerise frock
      yesterday at church!&mdash;she must see some beauty in life, or she could
      not play the piano as she did. He had a theory that musicians are
      incredibly complex, and know far less than other artists what they want
      and what they are; that they puzzle themselves as well as their friends;
      that their psychology is a modern development, and has not yet been
      understood. This theory, had he known it, had possibly just been
      illustrated by facts. Ignorant of the events of yesterday he was only
      riding over to get some tea, to see his niece, and to observe whether Miss
      Honeychurch saw anything beautiful in the desire of two old ladies to
      visit Athens.
    </p>
    <p>
      A carriage was drawn up outside Windy Corner, and just as he caught sight
      of the house it started, bowled up the drive, and stopped abruptly when it
      reached the main road. Therefore it must be the horse, who always expected
      people to walk up the hill in case they tired him. The door opened
      obediently, and two men emerged, whom Mr. Beebe recognized as Cecil and
      Freddy. They were an odd couple to go driving; but he saw a trunk beside
      the coachman&rsquo;s legs. Cecil, who wore a bowler, must be going away, while
      Freddy (a cap)&mdash;was seeing him to the station. They walked rapidly,
      taking the short cuts, and reached the summit while the carriage was still
      pursuing the windings of the road.
    </p>
    <p>
      They shook hands with the clergyman, but did not speak.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So you&rsquo;re off for a minute, Mr. Vyse?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      Cecil said, &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; while Freddy edged away.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I was coming to show you this delightful letter from those friends of
      Miss Honeychurch.&rdquo; He quoted from it. &ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t it wonderful? Isn&rsquo;t it
      romance? Most certainly they will go to Constantinople. They are taken in
      a snare that cannot fail. They will end by going round the world.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil listened civilly, and said he was sure that Lucy would be amused and
      interested.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t Romance capricious! I never notice it in you young people; you do
      nothing but play lawn tennis, and say that romance is dead, while the Miss
      Alans are struggling with all the weapons of propriety against the
      terrible thing. &lsquo;A really comfortable pension at Constantinople!&rsquo; So they
      call it out of decency, but in their hearts they want a pension with magic
      windows opening on the foam of perilous seas in fairyland forlorn! No
      ordinary view will content the Miss Alans. They want the Pension Keats.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m awfully sorry to interrupt, Mr. Beebe,&rdquo; said Freddy, &ldquo;but have you
      any matches?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have,&rdquo; said Cecil, and it did not escape Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s notice that he
      spoke to the boy more kindly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have never met these Miss Alans, have you, Mr. Vyse?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Never.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then you don&rsquo;t see the wonder of this Greek visit. I haven&rsquo;t been to
      Greece myself, and don&rsquo;t mean to go, and I can&rsquo;t imagine any of my friends
      going. It is altogether too big for our little lot. Don&rsquo;t you think so?
      Italy is just about as much as we can manage. Italy is heroic, but Greece
      is godlike or devilish&mdash;I am not sure which, and in either case
      absolutely out of our suburban focus. All right, Freddy&mdash;I am not
      being clever, upon my word I am not&mdash;I took the idea from another
      fellow; and give me those matches when you&rsquo;ve done with them.&rdquo; He lit a
      cigarette, and went on talking to the two young men. &ldquo;I was saying, if our
      poor little Cockney lives must have a background, let it be Italian. Big
      enough in all conscience. The ceiling of the Sistine Chapel for me. There
      the contrast is just as much as I can realize. But not the Parthenon, not
      the frieze of Phidias at any price; and here comes the victoria.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re quite right,&rdquo; said Cecil. &ldquo;Greece is not for our little lot&rdquo;; and
      he got in. Freddy followed, nodding to the clergyman, whom he trusted not
      to be pulling one&rsquo;s leg, really. And before they had gone a dozen yards he
      jumped out, and came running back for Vyse&rsquo;s match-box, which had not been
      returned. As he took it, he said: &ldquo;I&rsquo;m so glad you only talked about
      books. Cecil&rsquo;s hard hit. Lucy won&rsquo;t marry him. If you&rsquo;d gone on about her,
      as you did about them, he might have broken down.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But when&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Late last night. I must go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps they won&rsquo;t want me down there.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;go on. Good-bye.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Thank goodness!&rdquo; exclaimed Mr. Beebe to himself, and struck the saddle of
      his bicycle approvingly, &ldquo;It was the one foolish thing she ever did. Oh,
      what a glorious riddance!&rdquo; And, after a little thought, he negotiated the
      slope into Windy Corner, light of heart. The house was again as it ought
      to be&mdash;cut off forever from Cecil&rsquo;s pretentious world.
    </p>
    <p>
      He would find Miss Minnie down in the garden.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the drawing-room Lucy was tinkling at a Mozart Sonata. He hesitated a
      moment, but went down the garden as requested. There he found a mournful
      company. It was a blustering day, and the wind had taken and broken the
      dahlias. Mrs. Honeychurch, who looked cross, was tying them up, while Miss
      Bartlett, unsuitably dressed, impeded her with offers of assistance. At a
      little distance stood Minnie and the &ldquo;garden-child,&rdquo; a minute importation,
      each holding either end of a long piece of bass.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, how do you do, Mr. Beebe? Gracious what a mess everything is! Look at
      my scarlet pompoms, and the wind blowing your skirts about, and the ground
      so hard that not a prop will stick in, and then the carriage having to go
      out, when I had counted on having Powell, who&mdash;give everyone their
      due&mdash;does tie up dahlias properly.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Evidently Mrs. Honeychurch was shattered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you do?&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, with a meaning glance, as though
      conveying that more than dahlias had been broken off by the autumn gales.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Here, Lennie, the bass,&rdquo; cried Mrs. Honeychurch. The garden-child, who
      did not know what bass was, stood rooted to the path with horror. Minnie
      slipped to her uncle and whispered that everyone was very disagreeable
      to-day, and that it was not her fault if dahlia-strings would tear
      longways instead of across.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come for a walk with me,&rdquo; he told her. &ldquo;You have worried them as much as
      they can stand. Mrs. Honeychurch, I only called in aimlessly. I shall take
      her up to tea at the Beehive Tavern, if I may.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, must you? Yes do.&mdash;Not the scissors, thank you, Charlotte, when
      both my hands are full already&mdash;I&rsquo;m perfectly certain that the orange
      cactus will go before I can get to it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe, who was an adept at relieving situations, invited Miss Bartlett
      to accompany them to this mild festivity.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, Charlotte, I don&rsquo;t want you&mdash;do go; there&rsquo;s nothing to stop
      about for, either in the house or out of it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett said that her duty lay in the dahlia bed, but when she had
      exasperated everyone, except Minnie, by a refusal, she turned round and
      exasperated Minnie by an acceptance. As they walked up the garden, the
      orange cactus fell, and Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s last vision was of the garden-child
      clasping it like a lover, his dark head buried in a wealth of blossom.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is terrible, this havoc among the flowers,&rdquo; he remarked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is always terrible when the promise of months is destroyed in a
      moment,&rdquo; enunciated Miss Bartlett.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps we ought to send Miss Honeychurch down to her mother. Or will she
      come with us?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think we had better leave Lucy to herself, and to her own pursuits.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They&rsquo;re angry with Miss Honeychurch because she was late for breakfast,&rdquo;
       whispered Minnie, &ldquo;and Floyd has gone, and Mr. Vyse has gone, and Freddy
      won&rsquo;t play with me. In fact, Uncle Arthur, the house is not AT ALL what it
      was yesterday.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t be a prig,&rdquo; said her Uncle Arthur. &ldquo;Go and put on your boots.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He stepped into the drawing-room, where Lucy was still attentively
      pursuing the Sonatas of Mozart. She stopped when he entered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you do? Miss Bartlett and Minnie are coming with me to tea at the
      Beehive. Would you come too?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think I will, thank you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I didn&rsquo;t suppose you would care to much.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy turned to the piano and struck a few chords.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How delicate those Sonatas are!&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe, though at the bottom of
      his heart, he thought them silly little things.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy passed into Schumann.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Honeychurch!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I met them on the hill. Your brother told me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh he did?&rdquo; She sounded annoyed. Mr. Beebe felt hurt, for he had thought
      that she would like him to be told.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I needn&rsquo;t say that it will go no further.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mother, Charlotte, Cecil, Freddy, you,&rdquo; said Lucy, playing a note for
      each person who knew, and then playing a sixth note.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you&rsquo;ll let me say so, I am very glad, and I am certain that you have
      done the right thing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So I hoped other people would think, but they don&rsquo;t seem to.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I could see that Miss Bartlett thought it unwise.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So does mother. Mother minds dreadfully.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am very sorry for that,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe with feeling.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Honeychurch, who hated all changes, did mind, but not nearly as much
      as her daughter pretended, and only for the minute. It was really a ruse
      of Lucy&rsquo;s to justify her despondency&mdash;a ruse of which she was not
      herself conscious, for she was marching in the armies of darkness.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And Freddy minds.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Still, Freddy never hit it off with Vyse much, did he? I gathered that he
      disliked the engagement, and felt it might separate him from you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Boys are so odd.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Minnie could be heard arguing with Miss Bartlett through the floor. Tea at
      the Beehive apparently involved a complete change of apparel. Mr. Beebe
      saw that Lucy&mdash;very properly&mdash;did not wish to discuss her
      action, so after a sincere expression of sympathy, he said, &ldquo;I have had an
      absurd letter from Miss Alan. That was really what brought me over. I
      thought it might amuse you all.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How delightful!&rdquo; said Lucy, in a dull voice.
    </p>
    <p>
      For the sake of something to do, he began to read her the letter. After a
      few words her eyes grew alert, and soon she interrupted him with &ldquo;Going
      abroad? When do they start?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Next week, I gather.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Did Freddy say whether he was driving straight back?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, he didn&rsquo;t.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because I do hope he won&rsquo;t go gossiping.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      So she did want to talk about her broken engagement. Always complaisant,
      he put the letter away. But she, at once exclaimed in a high voice, &ldquo;Oh,
      do tell me more about the Miss Alans! How perfectly splendid of them to go
      abroad!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want them to start from Venice, and go in a cargo steamer down the
      Illyrian coast!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She laughed heartily. &ldquo;Oh, delightful! I wish they&rsquo;d take me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Has Italy filled you with the fever of travel? Perhaps George Emerson is
      right. He says that &lsquo;Italy is only an euphuism for Fate.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, not Italy, but Constantinople. I have always longed to go to
      Constantinople. Constantinople is practically Asia, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe reminded her that Constantinople was still unlikely, and that
      the Miss Alans only aimed at Athens, &ldquo;with Delphi, perhaps, if the roads
      are safe.&rdquo; But this made no difference to her enthusiasm. She had always
      longed to go to Greece even more, it seemed. He saw, to his surprise, that
      she was apparently serious.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t realize that you and the Miss Alans were still such friends,
      after Cissie Villa.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, that&rsquo;s nothing; I assure you Cissie Villa&rsquo;s nothing to me; I would
      give anything to go with them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Would your mother spare you again so soon? You have scarcely been home
      three months.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She MUST spare me!&rdquo; cried Lucy, in growing excitement. &ldquo;I simply MUST go
      away. I have to.&rdquo; She ran her fingers hysterically through her hair.
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you see that I HAVE to go away? I didn&rsquo;t realize at the time&mdash;and
      of course I want to see Constantinople so particularly.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You mean that since you have broken off your engagement you feel&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, yes. I knew you&rsquo;d understand.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe did not quite understand. Why could not Miss Honeychurch repose
      in the bosom of her family? Cecil had evidently taken up the dignified
      line, and was not going to annoy her. Then it struck him that her family
      itself might be annoying. He hinted this to her, and she accepted the hint
      eagerly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, of course; to go to Constantinople until they are used to the idea
      and everything has calmed down.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am afraid it has been a bothersome business,&rdquo; he said gently.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, not at all. Cecil was very kind indeed; only&mdash;I had better tell
      you the whole truth, since you have heard a little&mdash;it was that he is
      so masterful. I found that he wouldn&rsquo;t let me go my own way. He would
      improve me in places where I can&rsquo;t be improved. Cecil won&rsquo;t let a woman
      decide for herself&mdash;in fact, he daren&rsquo;t. What nonsense I do talk! But
      that is the kind of thing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is what I gathered from my own observation of Mr. Vyse; it is what I
      gather from all that I have known of you. I do sympathize and agree most
      profoundly. I agree so much that you must let me make one little
      criticism: Is it worth while rushing off to Greece?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I must go somewhere!&rdquo; she cried. &ldquo;I have been worrying all the
      morning, and here comes the very thing.&rdquo; She struck her knees with
      clenched fists, and repeated: &ldquo;I must! And the time I shall have with
      mother, and all the money she spent on me last spring. You all think much
      too highly of me. I wish you weren&rsquo;t so kind.&rdquo; At this moment Miss
      Bartlett entered, and her nervousness increased. &ldquo;I must get away, ever so
      far. I must know my own mind and where I want to go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come along; tea, tea, tea,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe, and bustled his guests out of
      the front-door. He hustled them so quickly that he forgot his hat. When he
      returned for it he heard, to his relief and surprise, the tinkling of a
      Mozart Sonata.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She is playing again,&rdquo; he said to Miss Bartlett.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy can always play,&rdquo; was the acid reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;One is very thankful that she has such a resource. She is evidently much
      worried, as, of course, she ought to be. I know all about it. The marriage
      was so near that it must have been a hard struggle before she could wind
      herself up to speak.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett gave a kind of wriggle, and he prepared for a discussion. He
      had never fathomed Miss Bartlett. As he had put it to himself at Florence,
      &ldquo;she might yet reveal depths of strangeness, if not of meaning.&rdquo; But she
      was so unsympathetic that she must be reliable. He assumed that much, and
      he had no hesitation in discussing Lucy with her. Minnie was fortunately
      collecting ferns.
    </p>
    <p>
      She opened the discussion with: &ldquo;We had much better let the matter drop.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I wonder.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is of the highest importance that there should be no gossip in Summer
      Street. It would be DEATH to gossip about Mr. Vyse&rsquo;s dismissal at the
      present moment.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe raised his eyebrows. Death is a strong word&mdash;surely too
      strong. There was no question of tragedy. He said: &ldquo;Of course, Miss
      Honeychurch will make the fact public in her own way, and when she
      chooses. Freddy only told me because he knew she would not mind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett civilly. &ldquo;Yet Freddy ought not to have told
      even you. One cannot be too careful.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Quite so.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I do implore absolute secrecy. A chance word to a chattering friend, and&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Exactly.&rdquo; He was used to these nervous old maids and to the exaggerated
      importance that they attach to words. A rector lives in a web of petty
      secrets, and confidences and warnings, and the wiser he is the less he
      will regard them. He will change the subject, as did Mr. Beebe, saying
      cheerfully: &ldquo;Have you heard from any Bertolini people lately? I believe
      you keep up with Miss Lavish. It is odd how we of that pension, who seemed
      such a fortuitous collection, have been working into one another&rsquo;s lives.
      Two, three, four, six of us&mdash;no, eight; I had forgotten the Emersons&mdash;have
      kept more or less in touch. We must really give the Signora a
      testimonial.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And, Miss Bartlett not favouring the scheme, they walked up the hill in a
      silence which was only broken by the rector naming some fern. On the
      summit they paused. The sky had grown wilder since he stood there last
      hour, giving to the land a tragic greatness that is rare in Surrey. Grey
      clouds were charging across tissues of white, which stretched and shredded
      and tore slowly, until through their final layers there gleamed a hint of
      the disappearing blue. Summer was retreating. The wind roared, the trees
      groaned, yet the noise seemed insufficient for those vast operations in
      heaven. The weather was breaking up, breaking, broken, and it is a sense
      of the fit rather than of the supernatural that equips such crises with
      the salvos of angelic artillery. Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s eyes rested on Windy Corner,
      where Lucy sat, practising Mozart. No smile came to his lips, and,
      changing the subject again, he said: &ldquo;We shan&rsquo;t have rain, but we shall
      have darkness, so let us hurry on. The darkness last night was appalling.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They reached the Beehive Tavern at about five o&rsquo;clock. That amiable
      hostelry possesses a verandah, in which the young and the unwise do dearly
      love to sit, while guests of more mature years seek a pleasant sanded
      room, and have tea at a table comfortably. Mr. Beebe saw that Miss
      Bartlett would be cold if she sat out, and that Minnie would be dull if
      she sat in, so he proposed a division of forces. They would hand the child
      her food through the window. Thus he was incidentally enabled to discuss
      the fortunes of Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have been thinking, Miss Bartlett,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;and, unless you very much
      object, I would like to reopen that discussion.&rdquo; She bowed. &ldquo;Nothing about
      the past. I know little and care less about that; I am absolutely certain
      that it is to your cousin&rsquo;s credit. She has acted loftily and rightly, and
      it is like her gentle modesty to say that we think too highly of her. But
      the future. Seriously, what do you think of this Greek plan?&rdquo; He pulled
      out the letter again. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know whether you overheard, but she wants
      to join the Miss Alans in their mad career. It&rsquo;s all&mdash;I can&rsquo;t explain&mdash;it&rsquo;s
      wrong.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett read the letter in silence, laid it down, seemed to
      hesitate, and then read it again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t see the point of it myself.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      To his astonishment, she replied: &ldquo;There I cannot agree with you. In it I
      spy Lucy&rsquo;s salvation.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Really. Now, why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She wanted to leave Windy Corner.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know&mdash;but it seems so odd, so unlike her, so&mdash;I was going to
      say&mdash;selfish.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is natural, surely&mdash;after such painful scenes&mdash;that she
      should desire a change.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Here, apparently, was one of those points that the male intellect misses.
      Mr. Beebe exclaimed: &ldquo;So she says herself, and since another lady agrees
      with her, I must own that I am partially convinced. Perhaps she must have
      a change. I have no sisters or&mdash;and I don&rsquo;t understand these things.
      But why need she go as far as Greece?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You may well ask that,&rdquo; replied Miss Bartlett, who was evidently
      interested, and had almost dropped her evasive manner. &ldquo;Why Greece? (What
      is it, Minnie dear&mdash;jam?) Why not Tunbridge Wells? Oh, Mr. Beebe! I
      had a long and most unsatisfactory interview with dear Lucy this morning.
      I cannot help her. I will say no more. Perhaps I have already said too
      much. I am not to talk. I wanted her to spend six months with me at
      Tunbridge Wells, and she refused.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe poked at a crumb with his knife.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But my feelings are of no importance. I know too well that I get on
      Lucy&rsquo;s nerves. Our tour was a failure. She wanted to leave Florence, and
      when we got to Rome she did not want to be in Rome, and all the time I
      felt that I was spending her mother&rsquo;s money&mdash;.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let us keep to the future, though,&rdquo; interrupted Mr. Beebe. &ldquo;I want your
      advice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well,&rdquo; said Charlotte, with a choky abruptness that was new to him,
      though familiar to Lucy. &ldquo;I for one will help her to go to Greece. Will
      you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe considered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is absolutely necessary,&rdquo; she continued, lowering her veil and
      whispering through it with a passion, an intensity, that surprised him. &ldquo;I
      know&mdash;I know.&rdquo; The darkness was coming on, and he felt that this odd
      woman really did know. &ldquo;She must not stop here a moment, and we must keep
      quiet till she goes. I trust that the servants know nothing. Afterwards&mdash;but
      I may have said too much already. Only, Lucy and I are helpless against
      Mrs. Honeychurch alone. If you help we may succeed. Otherwise&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Otherwise&mdash;?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Otherwise,&rdquo; she repeated as if the word held finality.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I will help her,&rdquo; said the clergyman, setting his jaw firm. &ldquo;Come,
      let us go back now, and settle the whole thing up.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett burst into florid gratitude. The tavern sign&mdash;a beehive
      trimmed evenly with bees&mdash;creaked in the wind outside as she thanked
      him. Mr. Beebe did not quite understand the situation; but then, he did
      not desire to understand it, nor to jump to the conclusion of &ldquo;another
      man&rdquo; that would have attracted a grosser mind. He only felt that Miss
      Bartlett knew of some vague influence from which the girl desired to be
      delivered, and which might well be clothed in the fleshly form. Its very
      vagueness spurred him into knight-errantry. His belief in celibacy, so
      reticent, so carefully concealed beneath his tolerance and culture, now
      came to the surface and expanded like some delicate flower. &ldquo;They that
      marry do well, but they that refrain do better.&rdquo; So ran his belief, and he
      never heard that an engagement was broken off but with a slight feeling of
      pleasure. In the case of Lucy, the feeling was intensified through dislike
      of Cecil; and he was willing to go further&mdash;to place her out of
      danger until she could confirm her resolution of virginity. The feeling
      was very subtle and quite undogmatic, and he never imparted it to any
      other of the characters in this entanglement. Yet it existed, and it alone
      explains his action subsequently, and his influence on the action of
      others. The compact that he made with Miss Bartlett in the tavern, was to
      help not only Lucy, but religion also.
    </p>
    <p>
      They hurried home through a world of black and grey. He conversed on
      indifferent topics: the Emersons&rsquo; need of a housekeeper; servants; Italian
      servants; novels about Italy; novels with a purpose; could literature
      influence life? Windy Corner glimmered. In the garden, Mrs. Honeychurch,
      now helped by Freddy, still wrestled with the lives of her flowers.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It gets too dark,&rdquo; she said hopelessly. &ldquo;This comes of putting off. We
      might have known the weather would break up soon; and now Lucy wants to go
      to Greece. I don&rsquo;t know what the world&rsquo;s coming to.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mrs. Honeychurch,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;go to Greece she must. Come up to the house
      and let&rsquo;s talk it over. Do you, in the first place, mind her breaking with
      Vyse?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Beebe, I&rsquo;m thankful&mdash;simply thankful.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So am I,&rdquo; said Freddy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good. Now come up to the house.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They conferred in the dining-room for half an hour.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy would never have carried the Greek scheme alone. It was expensive and
      dramatic&mdash;both qualities that her mother loathed. Nor would Charlotte
      have succeeded. The honours of the day rested with Mr. Beebe. By his tact
      and common sense, and by his influence as a clergyman&mdash;for a
      clergyman who was not a fool influenced Mrs. Honeychurch greatly&mdash;he
      bent her to their purpose, &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t see why Greece is necessary,&rdquo; she
      said; &ldquo;but as you do, I suppose it is all right. It must be something I
      can&rsquo;t understand. Lucy! Let&rsquo;s tell her. Lucy!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She is playing the piano,&rdquo; Mr. Beebe said. He opened the door, and heard
      the words of a song:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     &ldquo;Look not thou on beauty&rsquo;s charming.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t know that Miss Honeychurch sang, too.&rdquo;
     </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  &ldquo;Sit thou still when kings are arming,
   Taste not when the wine-cup glistens&mdash;&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a song that Cecil gave her. How odd girls are!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&rsquo;s that?&rdquo; called Lucy, stopping short.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right, dear,&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch kindly. She went into the
      drawing-room, and Mr. Beebe heard her kiss Lucy and say: &ldquo;I am sorry I was
      so cross about Greece, but it came on the top of the dahlias.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Rather a hard voice said: &ldquo;Thank you, mother; that doesn&rsquo;t matter a bit.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you are right, too&mdash;Greece will be all right; you can go if the
      Miss Alans will have you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, splendid! Oh, thank you!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe followed. Lucy still sat at the piano with her hands over the
      keys. She was glad, but he had expected greater gladness. Her mother bent
      over her. Freddy, to whom she had been singing, reclined on the floor with
      his head against her, and an unlit pipe between his lips. Oddly enough,
      the group was beautiful. Mr. Beebe, who loved the art of the past, was
      reminded of a favourite theme, the Santa Conversazione, in which people
      who care for one another are painted chatting together about noble things&mdash;a
      theme neither sensual nor sensational, and therefore ignored by the art of
      to-day. Why should Lucy want either to marry or to travel when she had
      such friends at home?
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  &ldquo;Taste not when the wine-cup glistens,
   Speak not when the people listens,&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      she continued.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Here&rsquo;s Mr. Beebe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Beebe knows my rude ways.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a beautiful song and a wise one,&rdquo; said he. &ldquo;Go on.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It isn&rsquo;t very good,&rdquo; she said listlessly. &ldquo;I forget why&mdash;harmony or
      something.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suspected it was unscholarly. It&rsquo;s so beautiful.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The tune&rsquo;s right enough,&rdquo; said Freddy, &ldquo;but the words are rotten. Why
      throw up the sponge?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How stupidly you talk!&rdquo; said his sister. The Santa Conversazione was
      broken up. After all, there was no reason that Lucy should talk about
      Greece or thank him for persuading her mother, so he said good-bye.
    </p>
    <p>
      Freddy lit his bicycle lamp for him in the porch, and with his usual
      felicity of phrase, said: &ldquo;This has been a day and a half.&rdquo;
     </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
    &ldquo;Stop thine ear against the singer&mdash;&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wait a minute; she is finishing.&rdquo;
     </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;From the red gold keep thy finger;
    Vacant heart and hand and eye
    Easy live and quiet die.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I love weather like this,&rdquo; said Freddy.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe passed into it.
    </p>
    <p>
      The two main facts were clear. She had behaved splendidly, and he had
      helped her. He could not expect to master the details of so big a change
      in a girl&rsquo;s life. If here and there he was dissatisfied or puzzled, he
      must acquiesce; she was choosing the better part.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Vacant heart and hand and eye&mdash;&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      Perhaps the song stated &ldquo;the better part&rdquo; rather too strongly. He half
      fancied that the soaring accompaniment&mdash;which he did not lose in the
      shout of the gale&mdash;really agreed with Freddy, and was gently
      criticizing the words that it adorned:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  &ldquo;Vacant heart and hand and eye
   Easy live and quiet die.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      However, for the fourth time Windy Corner lay poised below him&mdash;now
      as a beacon in the roaring tides of darkness.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
