<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 16: Lying to George</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
    <h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span><span epub:type="subtitle">Lying to George</span></h3>
    <p>
      But Lucy had developed since the spring. That is to say, she was now
      better able to stifle the emotions of which the conventions and the world
      disapprove. Though the danger was greater, she was not shaken by deep
      sobs. She said to Cecil, &ldquo;I am not coming in to tea&mdash;tell mother&mdash;I
      must write some letters,&rdquo; and went up to her room. Then she prepared for
      action. Love felt and returned, love which our bodies exact and our hearts
      have transfigured, love which is the most real thing that we shall ever
      meet, reappeared now as the world&rsquo;s enemy, and she must stifle it.
    </p>
    <p>
      She sent for Miss Bartlett.
    </p>
    <p>
      The contest lay not between love and duty. Perhaps there never is such a
      contest. It lay between the real and the pretended, and Lucy&rsquo;s first aim
      was to defeat herself. As her brain clouded over, as the memory of the
      views grew dim and the words of the book died away, she returned to her
      old shibboleth of nerves. She &ldquo;conquered her breakdown.&rdquo; Tampering with
      the truth, she forgot that the truth had ever been. Remembering that she
      was engaged to Cecil, she compelled herself to confused remembrances of
      George; he was nothing to her; he never had been anything; he had behaved
      abominably; she had never encouraged him. The armour of falsehood is
      subtly wrought out of darkness, and hides a man not only from others, but
      from his own soul. In a few moments Lucy was equipped for battle.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Something too awful has happened,&rdquo; she began, as soon as her cousin
      arrived. &ldquo;Do you know anything about Miss Lavish&rsquo;s novel?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett looked surprised, and said that she had not read the book,
      nor known that it was published; Eleanor was a reticent woman at heart.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is a scene in it. The hero and heroine make love. Do you know about
      that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dear&mdash;?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you know about it, please?&rdquo; she repeated. &ldquo;They are on a hillside, and
      Florence is in the distance.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My good Lucia, I am all at sea. I know nothing about it whatever.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There are violets. I cannot believe it is a coincidence. Charlotte,
      Charlotte, how could you have told her? I have thought before speaking; it
      must be you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Told her what?&rdquo; she asked, with growing agitation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;About that dreadful afternoon in February.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett was genuinely moved. &ldquo;Oh, Lucy, dearest girl&mdash;she
      hasn&rsquo;t put that in her book?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy nodded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not so that one could recognize it. Yes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then never&mdash;never&mdash;never more shall Eleanor Lavish be a friend
      of mine.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So you did tell?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I did just happen&mdash;when I had tea with her at Rome&mdash;in the
      course of conversation&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But Charlotte&mdash;what about the promise you gave me when we were
      packing? Why did you tell Miss Lavish, when you wouldn&rsquo;t even let me tell
      mother?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I will never forgive Eleanor. She has betrayed my confidence.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why did you tell her, though? This is a most serious thing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Why does any one tell anything? The question is eternal, and it was not
      surprising that Miss Bartlett should only sigh faintly in response. She
      had done wrong&mdash;she admitted it, she only hoped that she had not done
      harm; she had told Eleanor in the strictest confidence.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy stamped with irritation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cecil happened to read out the passage aloud to me and to Mr. Emerson; it
      upset Mr. Emerson and he insulted me again. Behind Cecil&rsquo;s back. Ugh! Is
      it possible that men are such brutes? Behind Cecil&rsquo;s back as we were
      walking up the garden.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett burst into self-accusations and regrets.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is to be done now? Can you tell me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Lucy&mdash;I shall never forgive myself, never to my dying day. Fancy
      if your prospects&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know,&rdquo; said Lucy, wincing at the word. &ldquo;I see now why you wanted me to
      tell Cecil, and what you meant by &lsquo;some other source.&rsquo; You knew that you
      had told Miss Lavish, and that she was not reliable.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It was Miss Bartlett&rsquo;s turn to wince. &ldquo;However,&rdquo; said the girl, despising
      her cousin&rsquo;s shiftiness, &ldquo;What&rsquo;s done&rsquo;s done. You have put me in a most
      awkward position. How am I to get out of it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett could not think. The days of her energy were over. She was a
      visitor, not a chaperon, and a discredited visitor at that. She stood with
      clasped hands while the girl worked herself into the necessary rage.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He must&mdash;that man must have such a setting down that he won&rsquo;t
      forget. And who&rsquo;s to give it him? I can&rsquo;t tell mother now&mdash;owing to
      you. Nor Cecil, Charlotte, owing to you. I am caught up every way. I think
      I shall go mad. I have no one to help me. That&rsquo;s why I&rsquo;ve sent for you.
      What&rsquo;s wanted is a man with a whip.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett agreed: one wanted a man with a whip.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes&mdash;but it&rsquo;s no good agreeing. What&rsquo;s to be DONE. We women go
      maundering on. What DOES a girl do when she comes across a cad?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I always said he was a cad, dear. Give me credit for that, at all events.
      From the very first moment&mdash;when he said his father was having a
      bath.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, bother the credit and who&rsquo;s been right or wrong! We&rsquo;ve both made a
      muddle of it. George Emerson is still down the garden there, and is he to
      be left unpunished, or isn&rsquo;t he? I want to know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett was absolutely helpless. Her own exposure had unnerved her,
      and thoughts were colliding painfully in her brain. She moved feebly to
      the window, and tried to detect the cad&rsquo;s white flannels among the
      laurels.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You were ready enough at the Bertolini when you rushed me off to Rome.
      Can&rsquo;t you speak again to him now?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Willingly would I move heaven and earth&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want something more definite,&rdquo; said Lucy contemptuously. &ldquo;Will you
      speak to him? It is the least you can do, surely, considering it all
      happened because you broke your word.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Never again shall Eleanor Lavish be a friend of mine.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Really, Charlotte was outdoing herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes or no, please; yes or no.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is the kind of thing that only a gentleman can settle.&rdquo; George Emerson
      was coming up the garden with a tennis ball in his hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well,&rdquo; said Lucy, with an angry gesture. &ldquo;No one will help me. I
      will speak to him myself.&rdquo; And immediately she realized that this was what
      her cousin had intended all along.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hullo, Emerson!&rdquo; called Freddy from below. &ldquo;Found the lost ball? Good
      man! Want any tea?&rdquo; And there was an irruption from the house on to the
      terrace.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Lucy, but that is brave of you! I admire you&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They had gathered round George, who beckoned, she felt, over the rubbish,
      the sloppy thoughts, the furtive yearnings that were beginning to cumber
      her soul. Her anger faded at the sight of him. Ah! The Emersons were fine
      people in their way. She had to subdue a rush in her blood before saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Freddy has taken him into the dining-room. The others are going down the
      garden. Come. Let us get this over quickly. Come. I want you in the room,
      of course.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy, do you mind doing it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How can you ask such a ridiculous question?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Poor Lucy&mdash;&rdquo; She stretched out her hand. &ldquo;I seem to bring nothing
      but misfortune wherever I go.&rdquo; Lucy nodded. She remembered their last
      evening at Florence&mdash;the packing, the candle, the shadow of Miss
      Bartlett&rsquo;s toque on the door. She was not to be trapped by pathos a second
      time. Eluding her cousin&rsquo;s caress, she led the way downstairs.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Try the jam,&rdquo; Freddy was saying. &ldquo;The jam&rsquo;s jolly good.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      George, looking big and dishevelled, was pacing up and down the
      dining-room. As she entered he stopped, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;nothing to eat.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You go down to the others,&rdquo; said Lucy; &ldquo;Charlotte and I will give Mr.
      Emerson all he wants. Where&rsquo;s mother?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She&rsquo;s started on her Sunday writing. She&rsquo;s in the drawing-room.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s all right. You go away.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He went off singing.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy sat down at the table. Miss Bartlett, who was thoroughly frightened,
      took up a book and pretended to read.
    </p>
    <p>
      She would not be drawn into an elaborate speech. She just said: &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t
      have it, Mr. Emerson. I cannot even talk to you. Go out of this house, and
      never come into it again as long as I live here&mdash;&rdquo; flushing as she
      spoke and pointing to the door. &ldquo;I hate a row. Go please.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No discussion.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I can&rsquo;t&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She shook her head. &ldquo;Go, please. I do not want to call in Mr. Vyse.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t mean,&rdquo; he said, absolutely ignoring Miss Bartlett&mdash;&ldquo;you
      don&rsquo;t mean that you are going to marry that man?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The line was unexpected.
    </p>
    <p>
      She shrugged her shoulders, as if his vulgarity wearied her. &ldquo;You are
      merely ridiculous,&rdquo; she said quietly.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then his words rose gravely over hers: &ldquo;You cannot live with Vyse. He&rsquo;s
      only for an acquaintance. He is for society and cultivated talk. He should
      know no one intimately, least of all a woman.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It was a new light on Cecil&rsquo;s character.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have you ever talked to Vyse without feeling tired?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can scarcely discuss&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, but have you ever? He is the sort who are all right so long as they
      keep to things&mdash;books, pictures&mdash;but kill when they come to
      people. That&rsquo;s why I&rsquo;ll speak out through all this muddle even now. It&rsquo;s
      shocking enough to lose you in any case, but generally a man must deny
      himself joy, and I would have held back if your Cecil had been a different
      person. I would never have let myself go. But I saw him first in the
      National Gallery, when he winced because my father mispronounced the names
      of great painters. Then he brings us here, and we find it is to play some
      silly trick on a kind neighbour. That is the man all over&mdash;playing
      tricks on people, on the most sacred form of life that he can find. Next,
      I meet you together, and find him protecting and teaching you and your
      mother to be shocked, when it was for YOU to settle whether you were
      shocked or no. Cecil all over again. He daren&rsquo;t let a woman decide. He&rsquo;s
      the type who&rsquo;s kept Europe back for a thousand years. Every moment of his
      life he&rsquo;s forming you, telling you what&rsquo;s charming or amusing or ladylike,
      telling you what a man thinks womanly; and you, you of all women, listen
      to his voice instead of to your own. So it was at the Rectory, when I met
      you both again; so it has been the whole of this afternoon. Therefore&mdash;not
      &lsquo;therefore I kissed you,&rsquo; because the book made me do that, and I wish to
      goodness I had more self-control. I&rsquo;m not ashamed. I don&rsquo;t apologize. But
      it has frightened you, and you may not have noticed that I love you. Or
      would you have told me to go, and dealt with a tremendous thing so
      lightly? But therefore&mdash;therefore I settled to fight him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy thought of a very good remark.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You say Mr. Vyse wants me to listen to him, Mr. Emerson. Pardon me for
      suggesting that you have caught the habit.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And he took the shoddy reproof and touched it into immortality. He said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I have,&rdquo; and sank down as if suddenly weary. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m the same kind of
      brute at bottom. This desire to govern a woman&mdash;it lies very deep,
      and men and women must fight it together before they shall enter the
      garden. But I do love you surely in a better way than he does.&rdquo; He
      thought. &ldquo;Yes&mdash;really in a better way. I want you to have your own
      thoughts even when I hold you in my arms.&rdquo; He stretched them towards her.
      &ldquo;Lucy, be quick&mdash;there&rsquo;s no time for us to talk now&mdash;come to me
      as you came in the spring, and afterwards I will be gentle and explain. I
      have cared for you since that man died. I cannot live without you, &lsquo;No
      good,&rsquo; I thought; &lsquo;she is marrying someone else&rsquo;; but I meet you again
      when all the world is glorious water and sun. As you came through the wood
      I saw that nothing else mattered. I called. I wanted to live and have my
      chance of joy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And Mr. Vyse?&rdquo; said Lucy, who kept commendably calm. &ldquo;Does he not matter?
      That I love Cecil and shall be his wife shortly? A detail of no
      importance, I suppose?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But he stretched his arms over the table towards her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;May I ask what you intend to gain by this exhibition?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He said: &ldquo;It is our last chance. I shall do all that I can.&rdquo; And as if he
      had done all else, he turned to Miss Bartlett, who sat like some portent
      against the skies of the evening. &ldquo;You wouldn&rsquo;t stop us this second time
      if you understood,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I have been into the dark, and I am going
      back into it, unless you will try to understand.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Her long, narrow head drove backwards and forwards, as though demolishing
      some invisible obstacle. She did not answer.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is being young,&rdquo; he said quietly, picking up his racquet from the
      floor and preparing to go. &ldquo;It is being certain that Lucy cares for me
      really. It is that love and youth matter intellectually.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      In silence the two women watched him. His last remark, they knew, was
      nonsense, but was he going after it or not? Would not he, the cad, the
      charlatan, attempt a more dramatic finish? No. He was apparently content.
      He left them, carefully closing the front door; and when they looked
      through the hall window, they saw him go up the drive and begin to climb
      the slopes of withered fern behind the house. Their tongues were loosed,
      and they burst into stealthy rejoicings.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Lucia&mdash;come back here&mdash;oh, what an awful man!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy had no reaction&mdash;at least, not yet. &ldquo;Well, he amuses me,&rdquo; she
      said. &ldquo;Either I&rsquo;m mad, or else he is, and I&rsquo;m inclined to think it&rsquo;s the
      latter. One more fuss through with you, Charlotte. Many thanks. I think,
      though, that this is the last. My admirer will hardly trouble me again.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And Miss Bartlett, too, essayed the roguish:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, it isn&rsquo;t everyone who could boast such a conquest, dearest, is it?
      Oh, one oughtn&rsquo;t to laugh, really. It might have been very serious. But
      you were so sensible and brave&mdash;so unlike the girls of my day.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s go down to them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But, once in the open air, she paused. Some emotion&mdash;pity, terror,
      love, but the emotion was strong&mdash;seized her, and she was aware of
      autumn. Summer was ending, and the evening brought her odours of decay,
      the more pathetic because they were reminiscent of spring. That something
      or other mattered intellectually? A leaf, violently agitated, danced past
      her, while other leaves lay motionless. That the earth was hastening to
      re-enter darkness, and the shadows of those trees over Windy Corner?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hullo, Lucy! There&rsquo;s still light enough for another set, if you two&rsquo;ll
      hurry.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Emerson has had to go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What a nuisance! That spoils the four. I say, Cecil, do play, do, there&rsquo;s
      a good chap. It&rsquo;s Floyd&rsquo;s last day. Do play tennis with us, just this
      once.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Cecil&rsquo;s voice came: &ldquo;My dear Freddy, I am no athlete. As you well remarked
      this very morning, &lsquo;There are some chaps who are no good for anything but
      books&rsquo;; I plead guilty to being such a chap, and will not inflict myself
      on you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The scales fell from Lucy&rsquo;s eyes. How had she stood Cecil for a moment? He
      was absolutely intolerable, and the same evening she broke off her
      engagement.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
