<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 12: Twelfth Chapter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
    <h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span><span epub:type="subtitle">Twelfth Chapter</span></h3>
    <p>
      It was a Saturday afternoon, gay and brilliant after abundant rains, and
      the spirit of youth dwelt in it, though the season was now autumn. All
      that was gracious triumphed. As the motorcars passed through Summer Street
      they raised only a little dust, and their stench was soon dispersed by the
      wind and replaced by the scent of the wet birches or of the pines. Mr.
      Beebe, at leisure for life&rsquo;s amenities, leant over his Rectory gate.
      Freddy leant by him, smoking a pendant pipe.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Suppose we go and hinder those new people opposite for a little.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;M&rsquo;m.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They might amuse you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Freddy, whom his fellow-creatures never amused, suggested that the new
      people might be feeling a bit busy, and so on, since they had only just
      moved in.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suggested we should hinder them,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe. &ldquo;They are worth it.&rdquo;
       Unlatching the gate, he sauntered over the triangular green to Cissie
      Villa. &ldquo;Hullo!&rdquo; he cried, shouting in at the open door, through which much
      squalor was visible.
    </p>
    <p>
      A grave voice replied, &ldquo;Hullo!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve brought someone to see you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll be down in a minute.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The passage was blocked by a wardrobe, which the removal men had failed to
      carry up the stairs. Mr. Beebe edged round it with difficulty. The
      sitting-room itself was blocked with books.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Are these people great readers?&rdquo; Freddy whispered. &ldquo;Are they that sort?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I fancy they know how to read&mdash;a rare accomplishment. What have they
      got? Byron. Exactly. A Shropshire Lad. Never heard of it. The Way of All
      Flesh. Never heard of it. Gibbon. Hullo! dear George reads German. Um&mdash;um&mdash;Schopenhauer,
      Nietzsche, and so we go on. Well, I suppose your generation knows its own
      business, Honeychurch.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Beebe, look at that,&rdquo; said Freddy in awestruck tones.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the cornice of the wardrobe, the hand of an amateur had painted this
      inscription: &ldquo;Mistrust all enterprises that require new clothes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know. Isn&rsquo;t it jolly? I like that. I&rsquo;m certain that&rsquo;s the old man&rsquo;s
      doing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How very odd of him!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Surely you agree?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But Freddy was his mother&rsquo;s son and felt that one ought not to go on
      spoiling the furniture.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Pictures!&rdquo; the clergyman continued, scrambling about the room. &ldquo;Giotto&mdash;they
      got that at Florence, I&rsquo;ll be bound.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The same as Lucy&rsquo;s got.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, by-the-by, did Miss Honeychurch enjoy London?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She came back yesterday.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suppose she had a good time?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, very,&rdquo; said Freddy, taking up a book. &ldquo;She and Cecil are thicker
      than ever.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s good hearing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I wish I wasn&rsquo;t such a fool, Mr. Beebe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe ignored the remark.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy used to be nearly as stupid as I am, but it&rsquo;ll be very different
      now, mother thinks. She will read all kinds of books.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So will you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Only medical books. Not books that you can talk about afterwards. Cecil
      is teaching Lucy Italian, and he says her playing is wonderful. There are
      all kinds of things in it that we have never noticed. Cecil says&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What on earth are those people doing upstairs? Emerson&mdash;we think
      we&rsquo;ll come another time.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      George ran down-stairs and pushed them into the room without speaking.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let me introduce Mr. Honeychurch, a neighbour.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Then Freddy hurled one of the thunderbolts of youth. Perhaps he was shy,
      perhaps he was friendly, or perhaps he thought that George&rsquo;s face wanted
      washing. At all events he greeted him with, &ldquo;How d&rsquo;ye do? Come and have a
      bathe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, all right,&rdquo; said George, impassive.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe was highly entertained.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;How d&rsquo;ye do? how d&rsquo;ye do? Come and have a bathe,&rsquo;&rdquo; he chuckled. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s
      the best conversational opening I&rsquo;ve ever heard. But I&rsquo;m afraid it will
      only act between men. Can you picture a lady who has been introduced to
      another lady by a third lady opening civilities with &lsquo;How do you do? Come
      and have a bathe&rsquo;? And yet you will tell me that the sexes are equal.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I tell you that they shall be,&rdquo; said Mr. Emerson, who had been slowly
      descending the stairs. &ldquo;Good afternoon, Mr. Beebe. I tell you they shall
      be comrades, and George thinks the same.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We are to raise ladies to our level?&rdquo; the clergyman inquired.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Garden of Eden,&rdquo; pursued Mr. Emerson, still descending, &ldquo;which you
      place in the past, is really yet to come. We shall enter it when we no
      longer despise our bodies.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe disclaimed placing the Garden of Eden anywhere.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In this&mdash;not in other things&mdash;we men are ahead. We despise the
      body less than women do. But not until we are comrades shall we enter the
      garden.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I say, what about this bathe?&rdquo; murmured Freddy, appalled at the mass of
      philosophy that was approaching him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I believed in a return to Nature once. But how can we return to Nature
      when we have never been with her? To-day, I believe that we must discover
      Nature. After many conquests we shall attain simplicity. It is our
      heritage.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let me introduce Mr. Honeychurch, whose sister you will remember at
      Florence.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you do? Very glad to see you, and that you are taking George for a
      bathe. Very glad to hear that your sister is going to marry. Marriage is a
      duty. I am sure that she will be happy, for we know Mr. Vyse, too. He has
      been most kind. He met us by chance in the National Gallery, and arranged
      everything about this delightful house. Though I hope I have not vexed Sir
      Harry Otway. I have met so few Liberal landowners, and I was anxious to
      compare his attitude towards the game laws with the Conservative attitude.
      Ah, this wind! You do well to bathe. Yours is a glorious country,
      Honeychurch!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not a bit!&rdquo; mumbled Freddy. &ldquo;I must&mdash;that is to say, I have to&mdash;have
      the pleasure of calling on you later on, my mother says, I hope.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;CALL, my lad? Who taught us that drawing-room twaddle? Call on your
      grandmother! Listen to the wind among the pines! Yours is a glorious
      country.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe came to the rescue.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Emerson, he will call, I shall call; you or your son will return our
      calls before ten days have elapsed. I trust that you have realized about
      the ten days&rsquo; interval. It does not count that I helped you with the
      stair-eyes yesterday. It does not count that they are going to bathe this
      afternoon.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, go and bathe, George. Why do you dawdle talking? Bring them back to
      tea. Bring back some milk, cakes, honey. The change will do you good.
      George has been working very hard at his office. I can&rsquo;t believe he&rsquo;s
      well.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      George bowed his head, dusty and sombre, exhaling the peculiar smell of
      one who has handled furniture.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you really want this bathe?&rdquo; Freddy asked him. &ldquo;It is only a pond,
      don&rsquo;t you know. I dare say you are used to something better.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes&mdash;I have said &lsquo;Yes&rsquo; already.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe felt bound to assist his young friend, and led the way out of
      the house and into the pine-woods. How glorious it was! For a little time
      the voice of old Mr. Emerson pursued them dispensing good wishes and
      philosophy. It ceased, and they only heard the fair wind blowing the
      bracken and the trees. Mr. Beebe, who could be silent, but who could not
      bear silence, was compelled to chatter, since the expedition looked like a
      failure, and neither of his companions would utter a word. He spoke of
      Florence. George attended gravely, assenting or dissenting with slight but
      determined gestures that were as inexplicable as the motions of the
      tree-tops above their heads.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And what a coincidence that you should meet Mr. Vyse! Did you realize
      that you would find all the Pension Bertolini down here?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I did not. Miss Lavish told me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When I was a young man, I always meant to write a &lsquo;History of
      Coincidence.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      No enthusiasm.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Though, as a matter of fact, coincidences are much rarer than we suppose.
      For example, it isn&rsquo;t purely coincidentally that you are here now, when
      one comes to reflect.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      To his relief, George began to talk.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is. I have reflected. It is Fate. Everything is Fate. We are flung
      together by Fate, drawn apart by Fate&mdash;flung together, drawn apart.
      The twelve winds blow us&mdash;we settle nothing&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have not reflected at all,&rdquo; rapped the clergyman. &ldquo;Let me give you a
      useful tip, Emerson: attribute nothing to Fate. Don&rsquo;t say, &lsquo;I didn&rsquo;t do
      this,&rsquo; for you did it, ten to one. Now I&rsquo;ll cross-question you. Where did
      you first meet Miss Honeychurch and myself?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Italy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And where did you meet Mr. Vyse, who is going to marry Miss Honeychurch?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;National Gallery.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Looking at Italian art. There you are, and yet you talk of coincidence
      and Fate. You naturally seek out things Italian, and so do we and our
      friends. This narrows the field immeasurably we meet again in it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is Fate that I am here,&rdquo; persisted George. &ldquo;But you can call it Italy
      if it makes you less unhappy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe slid away from such heavy treatment of the subject. But he was
      infinitely tolerant of the young, and had no desire to snub George.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And so for this and for other reasons my &lsquo;History of Coincidence&rsquo; is
      still to write.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      Wishing to round off the episode, he added; &ldquo;We are all so glad that you
      have come.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Here we are!&rdquo; called Freddy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, good!&rdquo; exclaimed Mr. Beebe, mopping his brow.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In there&rsquo;s the pond. I wish it was bigger,&rdquo; he added apologetically.
    </p>
    <p>
      They climbed down a slippery bank of pine-needles. There lay the pond, set
      in its little alp of green&mdash;only a pond, but large enough to contain
      the human body, and pure enough to reflect the sky. On account of the
      rains, the waters had flooded the surrounding grass, which showed like a
      beautiful emerald path, tempting these feet towards the central pool.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s distinctly successful, as ponds go,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe. &ldquo;No apologies
      are necessary for the pond.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      George sat down where the ground was dry, and drearily unlaced his boots.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Aren&rsquo;t those masses of willow-herb splendid? I love willow-herb in seed.
      What&rsquo;s the name of this aromatic plant?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      No one knew, or seemed to care.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;These abrupt changes of vegetation&mdash;this little spongeous tract of
      water plants, and on either side of it all the growths are tough or
      brittle&mdash;heather, bracken, hurts, pines. Very charming, very
      charming.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Beebe, aren&rsquo;t you bathing?&rdquo; called Freddy, as he stripped himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe thought he was not.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Water&rsquo;s wonderful!&rdquo; cried Freddy, prancing in.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Water&rsquo;s water,&rdquo; murmured George. Wetting his hair first&mdash;a sure sign
      of apathy&mdash;he followed Freddy into the divine, as indifferent as if
      he were a statue and the pond a pail of soapsuds. It was necessary to use
      his muscles. It was necessary to keep clean. Mr. Beebe watched them, and
      watched the seeds of the willow-herb dance chorically above their heads.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Apooshoo, apooshoo, apooshoo,&rdquo; went Freddy, swimming for two strokes in
      either direction, and then becoming involved in reeds or mud.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is it worth it?&rdquo; asked the other, Michelangelesque on the flooded margin.
    </p>
    <p>
      The bank broke away, and he fell into the pool before he had weighed the
      question properly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hee-poof&mdash;I&rsquo;ve swallowed a pollywog, Mr. Beebe, water&rsquo;s wonderful,
      water&rsquo;s simply ripping.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Water&rsquo;s not so bad,&rdquo; said George, reappearing from his plunge, and
      sputtering at the sun.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Water&rsquo;s wonderful. Mr. Beebe, do.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Apooshoo, kouf.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe, who was hot, and who always acquiesced where possible, looked
      around him. He could detect no parishioners except the pine-trees, rising
      up steeply on all sides, and gesturing to each other against the blue. How
      glorious it was! The world of motor-cars and rural Deans receded
      inimitably. Water, sky, evergreens, a wind&mdash;these things not even the
      seasons can touch, and surely they lie beyond the intrusion of man?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I may as well wash too&rdquo;; and soon his garments made a third little pile
      on the sward, and he too asserted the wonder of the water.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was ordinary water, nor was there very much of it, and, as Freddy said,
      it reminded one of swimming in a salad. The three gentlemen rotated in the
      pool breast high, after the fashion of the nymphs in Gotterdammerung. But
      either because the rains had given a freshness or because the sun was
      shedding a most glorious heat, or because two of the gentlemen were young
      in years and the third young in spirit&mdash;for some reason or other a
      change came over them, and they forgot Italy and Botany and Fate. They
      began to play. Mr. Beebe and Freddy splashed each other. A little
      deferentially, they splashed George. He was quiet: they feared they had
      offended him. Then all the forces of youth burst out. He smiled, flung
      himself at them, splashed them, ducked them, kicked them, muddied them,
      and drove them out of the pool.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Race you round it, then,&rdquo; cried Freddy, and they raced in the sunshine,
      and George took a short cut and dirtied his shins, and had to bathe a
      second time. Then Mr. Beebe consented to run&mdash;a memorable sight.
    </p>
    <p>
      They ran to get dry, they bathed to get cool, they played at being Indians
      in the willow-herbs and in the bracken, they bathed to get clean. And all
      the time three little bundles lay discreetly on the sward, proclaiming:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No. We are what matters. Without us shall no enterprise begin. To us
      shall all flesh turn in the end.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A try! A try!&rdquo; yelled Freddy, snatching up George&rsquo;s bundle and placing it
      beside an imaginary goal-post.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Socker rules,&rdquo; George retorted, scattering Freddy&rsquo;s bundle with a kick.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Goal!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Goal!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Pass!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Take care my watch!&rdquo; cried Mr. Beebe.
    </p>
    <p>
      Clothes flew in all directions.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Take care my hat! No, that&rsquo;s enough, Freddy. Dress now. No, I say!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But the two young men were delirious. Away they twinkled into the trees,
      Freddy with a clerical waistcoat under his arm, George with a wide-awake
      hat on his dripping hair.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;ll do!&rdquo; shouted Mr. Beebe, remembering that after all he was in his
      own parish. Then his voice changed as if every pine-tree was a Rural Dean.
      &ldquo;Hi! Steady on! I see people coming you fellows!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Yells, and widening circles over the dappled earth.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hi! hi! LADIES!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Neither George nor Freddy was truly refined. Still, they did not hear Mr.
      Beebe&rsquo;s last warning or they would have avoided Mrs. Honeychurch, Cecil,
      and Lucy, who were walking down to call on old Mrs. Butterworth. Freddy
      dropped the waistcoat at their feet, and dashed into some bracken. George
      whooped in their faces, turned and scudded away down the path to the pond,
      still clad in Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s hat.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Gracious alive!&rdquo; cried Mrs. Honeychurch. &ldquo;Whoever were those unfortunate
      people? Oh, dears, look away! And poor Mr. Beebe, too! Whatever has
      happened?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come this way immediately,&rdquo; commanded Cecil, who always felt that he must
      lead women, though he knew not whither, and protect them, though he knew not
      against what. He led them now towards the bracken where Freddy sat
      concealed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, poor Mr. Beebe! Was that his waistcoat we left in the path? Cecil,
      Mr. Beebe&rsquo;s waistcoat&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      No business of ours, said Cecil, glancing at Lucy, who was all parasol and
      evidently &ldquo;minded.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I fancy Mr. Beebe jumped back into the pond.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This way, please, Mrs. Honeychurch, this way.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They followed him up the bank attempting the tense yet nonchalant
      expression that is suitable for ladies on such occasions.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I can&rsquo;t help it,&rdquo; said a voice close ahead, and Freddy reared a
      freckled face and a pair of snowy shoulders out of the fronds. &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t be
      trodden on, can I?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good gracious me, dear; so it&rsquo;s you! What miserable management! Why not
      have a comfortable bath at home, with hot and cold laid on?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Look here, mother, a fellow must wash, and a fellow&rsquo;s got to dry, and if
      another fellow&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dear, no doubt you&rsquo;re right as usual, but you are in no position to
      argue. Come, Lucy.&rdquo; They turned. &ldquo;Oh, look&mdash;don&rsquo;t look! Oh, poor Mr.
      Beebe! How unfortunate again&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      For Mr. Beebe was just crawling out of the pond, on whose surface garments
      of an intimate nature did float; while George, the world-weary George,
      shouted to Freddy that he had hooked a fish.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And me, I&rsquo;ve swallowed one,&rdquo; answered he of the bracken. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve swallowed
      a pollywog. It wriggleth in my tummy. I shall die&mdash;Emerson you beast,
      you&rsquo;ve got on my bags.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hush, dears,&rdquo; said Mrs. Honeychurch, who found it impossible to remain
      shocked. &ldquo;And do be sure you dry yourselves thoroughly first. All these
      colds come of not drying thoroughly.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mother, do come away,&rdquo; said Lucy. &ldquo;Oh for goodness&rsquo; sake, do come.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hullo!&rdquo; cried George, so that again the ladies stopped.
    </p>
    <p>
      He regarded himself as dressed. Barefoot, bare-chested, radiant and
      personable against the shadowy woods, he called:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hullo, Miss Honeychurch! Hullo!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Bow, Lucy; better bow. Whoever is it? I shall bow.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Honeychurch bowed.
    </p>
    <p>
      That evening and all that night the water ran away. On the morrow the pool
      had shrunk to its old size and lost its glory. It had been a call to the
      blood and to the relaxed will, a passing benediction whose influence did
      not pass, a holiness, a spell, a momentary chalice for youth.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
