<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 14: How Lucy Faced the External Situation Bravely</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
    <h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span><span epub:type="subtitle">How Lucy Faced the External Situation Bravely</span></h3>
    <p>
      Of course Miss Bartlett accepted. And, equally of course, she felt sure
      that she would prove a nuisance, and begged to be given an inferior spare
      room&mdash;something with no view, anything. Her love to Lucy. And,
      equally of course, George Emerson could come to tennis on the Sunday week.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy faced the situation bravely, though, like most of us, she only faced
      the situation that encompassed her. She never gazed inwards. If at times
      strange images rose from the depths, she put them down to nerves. When
      Cecil brought the Emersons to Summer Street, it had upset her nerves.
      Charlotte would burnish up past foolishness, and this might upset her
      nerves. She was nervous at night. When she talked to George&mdash;they met
      again almost immediately at the Rectory&mdash;his voice moved her deeply,
      and she wished to remain near him. How dreadful if she really wished to
      remain near him! Of course, the wish was due to nerves, which love to play
      such perverse tricks upon us. Once she had suffered from &ldquo;things that came
      out of nothing and meant she didn&rsquo;t know what.&rdquo; Now Cecil had explained
      psychology to her one wet afternoon, and all the troubles of youth in an
      unknown world could be dismissed.
    </p>
    <p>
      It is obvious enough for the reader to conclude, &ldquo;She loves young
      Emerson.&rdquo; A reader in Lucy&rsquo;s place would not find it obvious. Life is easy
      to chronicle, but bewildering to practice, and we welcome &ldquo;nerves&rdquo; or any
      other shibboleth that will cloak our personal desire. She loved Cecil;
      George made her nervous; will the reader explain to her that the phrases
      should have been reversed?
    </p>
    <p>
      But the external situation&mdash;she will face that bravely.
    </p>
    <p>
      The meeting at the Rectory had passed off well enough. Standing between
      Mr. Beebe and Cecil, she had made a few temperate allusions to Italy, and
      George had replied. She was anxious to show that she was not shy, and was
      glad that he did not seem shy either.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A nice fellow,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe afterwards &ldquo;He will work off his crudities
      in time. I rather mistrust young men who slip into life gracefully.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy said, &ldquo;He seems in better spirits. He laughs more.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; replied the clergyman. &ldquo;He is waking up.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      That was all. But, as the week wore on, more of her defences fell, and she
      entertained an image that had physical beauty. In spite of the clearest
      directions, Miss Bartlett contrived to bungle her arrival. She was due at
      the South-Eastern station at Dorking, whither Mrs. Honeychurch drove to
      meet her. She arrived at the London and Brighton station, and had to hire
      a cab up. No one was at home except Freddy and his friend, who had to stop
      their tennis and to entertain her for a solid hour. Cecil and Lucy turned
      up at four o&rsquo;clock, and these, with little Minnie Beebe, made a somewhat
      lugubrious sextette upon the upper lawn for tea.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I shall never forgive myself,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, who kept on rising
      from her seat, and had to be begged by the united company to remain. &ldquo;I
      have upset everything. Bursting in on young people! But I insist on paying
      for my cab up. Grant that, at any rate.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Our visitors never do such dreadful things,&rdquo; said Lucy, while her
      brother, in whose memory the boiled egg had already grown unsubstantial,
      exclaimed in irritable tones: &ldquo;Just what I&rsquo;ve been trying to convince
      Cousin Charlotte of, Lucy, for the last half hour.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I do not feel myself an ordinary visitor,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, and looked
      at her frayed glove.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right, if you&rsquo;d really rather. Five shillings, and I gave a bob to
      the driver.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett looked in her purse. Only sovereigns and pennies. Could any
      one give her change? Freddy had half a quid and his friend had four
      half-crowns. Miss Bartlett accepted their moneys and then said: &ldquo;But who
      am I to give the sovereign to?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s leave it all till mother comes back,&rdquo; suggested Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, dear; your mother may take quite a long drive now that she is not
      hampered with me. We all have our little foibles, and mine is the prompt
      settling of accounts.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Here Freddy&rsquo;s friend, Mr. Floyd, made the one remark of his that need be
      quoted: he offered to toss Freddy for Miss Bartlett&rsquo;s quid. A solution
      seemed in sight, and even Cecil, who had been ostentatiously drinking his
      tea at the view, felt the eternal attraction of Chance, and turned round.
    </p>
    <p>
      But this did not do, either.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Please&mdash;please&mdash;I know I am a sad spoil-sport, but it would make
      me wretched. I should practically be robbing the one who lost.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Freddy owes me fifteen shillings,&rdquo; interposed Cecil. &ldquo;So it will work out
      right if you give the pound to me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Fifteen shillings,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett dubiously. &ldquo;How is that, Mr.
      Vyse?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because, don&rsquo;t you see, Freddy paid your cab. Give me the pound, and we
      shall avoid this deplorable gambling.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett, who was poor at figures, became bewildered and rendered up
      the sovereign, amidst the suppressed gurgles of the other youths. For a
      moment Cecil was happy. He was playing at nonsense among his peers. Then
      he glanced at Lucy, in whose face petty anxieties had marred the smiles.
      In January he would rescue his Leonardo from this stupefying twaddle.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I don&rsquo;t see that!&rdquo; exclaimed Minnie Beebe who had narrowly watched
      the iniquitous transaction. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t see why Mr. Vyse is to have the
      quid.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because of the fifteen shillings and the five,&rdquo; they said solemnly.
      &ldquo;Fifteen shillings and five shillings make one pound, you see.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I don&rsquo;t see&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They tried to stifle her with cake.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, thank you. I&rsquo;m done. I don&rsquo;t see why&mdash;Freddy, don&rsquo;t poke me.
      Miss Honeychurch, your brother&rsquo;s hurting me. Ow! What about Mr. Floyd&rsquo;s
      ten shillings? Ow! No, I don&rsquo;t see and I never shall see why Miss
      What&rsquo;s-her-name shouldn&rsquo;t pay that bob for the driver.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I had forgotten the driver,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, reddening. &ldquo;Thank you,
      dear, for reminding me. A shilling was it? Can any one give me change for
      half a crown?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll get it,&rdquo; said the young hostess, rising with decision.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cecil, give me that sovereign. No, give me up that sovereign. I&rsquo;ll get
      Euphemia to change it, and we&rsquo;ll start the whole thing again from the
      beginning.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy&mdash;Lucy&mdash;what a nuisance I am!&rdquo; protested Miss Bartlett, and
      followed her across the lawn. Lucy tripped ahead, simulating hilarity.
      When they were out of earshot Miss Bartlett stopped her wails and said
      quite briskly: &ldquo;Have you told him about him yet?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I haven&rsquo;t,&rdquo; replied Lucy, and then could have bitten her tongue for
      understanding so quickly what her cousin meant. &ldquo;Let me see&mdash;a
      sovereign&rsquo;s worth of silver.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She escaped into the kitchen. Miss Bartlett&rsquo;s sudden transitions were too
      uncanny. It sometimes seemed as if she planned every word she spoke or
      caused to be spoken; as if all this worry about cabs and change had been a
      ruse to surprise the soul.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I haven&rsquo;t told Cecil or any one,&rdquo; she remarked, when she returned. &ldquo;I
      promised you I shouldn&rsquo;t. Here is your money&mdash;all shillings, except
      two half-crowns. Would you count it? You can settle your debt nicely now.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett was in the drawing-room, gazing at the photograph of St.
      John ascending, which had been framed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How dreadful!&rdquo; she murmured, &ldquo;how more than dreadful, if Mr. Vyse should
      come to hear of it from some other source.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, no, Charlotte,&rdquo; said the girl, entering the battle. &ldquo;George Emerson
      is all right, and what other source is there?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett considered. &ldquo;For instance, the driver. I saw him looking
      through the bushes at you, remember he had a violet between his teeth.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy shuddered a little. &ldquo;We shall get the silly affair on our nerves if
      we aren&rsquo;t careful. How could a Florentine cab-driver ever get hold of
      Cecil?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We must think of every possibility.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, it&rsquo;s all right.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Or perhaps old Mr. Emerson knows. In fact, he is certain to know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t care if he does. I was grateful to you for your letter, but even
      if the news does get round, I think I can trust Cecil to laugh at it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To contradict it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, to laugh at it.&rdquo; But she knew in her heart that she could not trust
      him, for he desired her untouched.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well, dear, you know best. Perhaps gentlemen are different to what
      they were when I was young. Ladies are certainly different.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now, Charlotte!&rdquo; She struck at her playfully. &ldquo;You kind, anxious thing.
      What WOULD you have me do? First you say &lsquo;Don&rsquo;t tell&rsquo;; and then you say,
      &lsquo;Tell&rsquo;. Which is it to be? Quick!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett sighed &ldquo;I am no match for you in conversation, dearest. I
      blush when I think how I interfered at Florence, and you so well able to
      look after yourself, and so much cleverer in all ways than I am. You will
      never forgive me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Shall we go out, then. They will smash all the china if we don&rsquo;t.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      For the air rang with the shrieks of Minnie, who was being scalped with a
      teaspoon.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dear, one moment&mdash;we may not have this chance for a chat again. Have
      you seen the young one yet?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I have.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What happened?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We met at the Rectory.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What line is he taking up?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No line. He talked about Italy, like any other person. It is really all
      right. What advantage would he get from being a cad, to put it bluntly? I
      do wish I could make you see it my way. He really won&rsquo;t be any nuisance,
      Charlotte.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Once a cad, always a cad. That is my poor opinion.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy paused. &ldquo;Cecil said one day&mdash;and I thought it so profound&mdash;that
      there are two kinds of cads&mdash;the conscious and the subconscious.&rdquo; She
      paused again, to be sure of doing justice to Cecil&rsquo;s profundity. Through
      the window she saw Cecil himself, turning over the pages of a novel. It
      was a new one from Smith&rsquo;s library. Her mother must have returned from the
      station.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Once a cad, always a cad,&rdquo; droned Miss Bartlett.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What I mean by subconscious is that Emerson lost his head. I fell into
      all those violets, and he was silly and surprised. I don&rsquo;t think we ought
      to blame him very much. It makes such a difference when you see a person
      with beautiful things behind him unexpectedly. It really does; it makes an
      enormous difference, and he lost his head: he doesn&rsquo;t admire me, or any of
      that nonsense, one straw. Freddy rather likes him, and has asked him up
      here on Sunday, so you can judge for yourself. He has improved; he doesn&rsquo;t
      always look as if he&rsquo;s going to burst into tears. He is a clerk in the
      General Manager&rsquo;s office at one of the big railways&mdash;not a porter!
      and runs down to his father for week-ends. Papa was to do with journalism,
      but is rheumatic and has retired. There! Now for the garden.&rdquo; She took
      hold of her guest by the arm. &ldquo;Suppose we don&rsquo;t talk about this silly
      Italian business any more. We want you to have a nice restful visit at
      Windy Corner, with no worriting.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy thought this rather a good speech. The reader may have detected an
      unfortunate slip in it. Whether Miss Bartlett detected the slip one cannot
      say, for it is impossible to penetrate into the minds of elderly people.
      She might have spoken further, but they were interrupted by the entrance
      of her hostess. Explanations took place, and in the midst of them Lucy
      escaped, the images throbbing a little more vividly in her brain.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
