<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4: Fourth Chapter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1-4" epub:type="chapter">
   <h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span><span epub:type="subtitle">Fourth Chapter</span></h3>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe was right. Lucy never knew her desires so clearly as after
      music. She had not really appreciated the clergyman&rsquo;s wit, nor the
      suggestive twitterings of Miss Alan. Conversation was tedious; she wanted
      something big, and she believed that it would have come to her on the
      wind-swept platform of an electric tram. This she might not attempt. It
      was unladylike. Why? Why were most big things unladylike? Charlotte had
      once explained to her why. It was not that ladies were inferior to men; it
      was that they were different. Their mission was to inspire others to
      achievement rather than to achieve themselves. Indirectly, by means of
      tact and a spotless name, a lady could accomplish much. But if she rushed
      into the fray herself she would be first censured, then despised, and
      finally ignored. Poems had been written to illustrate this point.
    </p>
    <p>
      There is much that is immortal in this medieval lady. The dragons have
      gone, and so have the knights, but still she lingers in our midst. She
      reigned in many an early Victorian castle, and was Queen of much early
      Victorian song. It is sweet to protect her in the intervals of business,
      sweet to pay her honour when she has cooked our dinner well. But alas! the
      creature grows degenerate. In her heart also there are springing up
      strange desires. She too is enamoured of heavy winds, and vast panoramas,
      and green expanses of the sea. She has marked the kingdom of this world,
      how full it is of wealth, and beauty, and war&mdash;a radiant crust, built
      around the central fires, spinning towards the receding heavens. Men,
      declaring that she inspires them to it, move joyfully over the surface,
      having the most delightful meetings with other men, happy, not because
      they are masculine, but because they are alive. Before the show breaks up
      she would like to drop the august title of the Eternal Woman, and go there
      as her transitory self.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy does not stand for the medieval lady, who was rather an ideal to
      which she was bidden to lift her eyes when feeling serious. Nor has she
      any system of revolt. Here and there a restriction annoyed her
      particularly, and she would transgress it, and perhaps be sorry that she
      had done so. This afternoon she was peculiarly restive. She would really
      like to do something of which her well-wishers disapproved. As she might
      not go on the electric tram, she went to Alinari&rsquo;s shop.
    </p>
    <p>
      There she bought a photograph of Botticelli&rsquo;s &ldquo;Birth of Venus.&rdquo; Venus,
      being a pity, spoilt the picture, otherwise so charming, and Miss Bartlett
      had persuaded her to do without it. (A pity in art of course signified the
      nude.) Giorgione&rsquo;s &ldquo;Tempesta,&rdquo; the &ldquo;Idolino,&rdquo; some of the Sistine frescoes
      and the Apoxyomenos, were added to it. She felt a little calmer then, and
      bought Fra Angelico&rsquo;s &ldquo;Coronation,&rdquo; Giotto&rsquo;s &ldquo;Ascension of St. John,&rdquo; some
      Della Robbia babies, and some Guido Reni Madonnas. For her taste was
      catholic, and she extended uncritical approval to every well-known name.
    </p>
    <p>
      But though she spent nearly seven lire, the gates of liberty seemed still
      unopened. She was conscious of her discontent; it was new to her to be
      conscious of it. &ldquo;The world,&rdquo; she thought, &ldquo;is certainly full of beautiful
      things, if only I could come across them.&rdquo; It was not surprising that Mrs.
      Honeychurch disapproved of music, declaring that it always left her
      daughter peevish, unpractical, and touchy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nothing ever happens to me,&rdquo; she reflected, as she entered the Piazza
      Signoria and looked nonchalantly at its marvels, now fairly familiar to
      her. The great square was in shadow; the sunshine had come too late to
      strike it. Neptune was already unsubstantial in the twilight, half god,
      half ghost, and his fountain plashed dreamily to the men and satyrs who
      idled together on its marge. The Loggia showed as the triple entrance of a
      cave, wherein many a deity, shadowy, but immortal, looking forth upon the
      arrivals and departures of mankind. It was the hour of unreality&mdash;the
      hour, that is, when unfamiliar things are real. An older person at such an
      hour and in such a place might think that sufficient was happening to him,
      and rest content. Lucy desired more.
    </p>
    <p>
      She fixed her eyes wistfully on the tower of the palace, which rose out of
      the lower darkness like a pillar of roughened gold. It seemed no longer a
      tower, no longer supported by earth, but some unattainable treasure
      throbbing in the tranquil sky. Its brightness mesmerized her, still
      dancing before her eyes when she bent them to the ground and started
      towards home.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then something did happen.
    </p>
    <p>
      Two Italians by the Loggia had been bickering about a debt. &ldquo;Cinque lire,&rdquo;
       they had cried, &ldquo;cinque lire!&rdquo; They sparred at each other, and one of them
      was hit lightly upon the chest. He frowned; he bent towards Lucy with a
      look of interest, as if he had an important message for her. He opened his
      lips to deliver it, and a stream of red came out between them and trickled
      down his unshaven chin.
    </p>
    <p>
      That was all. A crowd rose out of the dusk. It hid this extraordinary man
      from her, and bore him away to the fountain. Mr. George Emerson happened
      to be a few paces away, looking at her across the spot where the man had
      been. How very odd! Across something. Even as she caught sight of him he
      grew dim; the palace itself grew dim, swayed above her, fell on to her
      softly, slowly, noiselessly, and the sky fell with it.
    </p>
    <p>
      She thought: &ldquo;Oh, what have I done?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, what have I done?&rdquo; she murmured, and opened her eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      George Emerson still looked at her, but not across anything. She had
      complained of dullness, and lo! one man was stabbed, and another held her
      in his arms.
    </p>
    <p>
      They were sitting on some steps in the Uffizi Arcade. He must have carried
      her. He rose when she spoke, and began to dust his knees. She repeated:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, what have I done?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You fainted.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&mdash;I am very sorry.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How are you now?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perfectly well&mdash;absolutely well.&rdquo; And she began to nod and smile.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then let us come home. There&rsquo;s no point in our stopping.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He held out his hand to pull her up. She pretended not to see it. The
      cries from the fountain&mdash;they had never ceased&mdash;rang emptily.
      The whole world seemed pale and void of its original meaning.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How very kind you have been! I might have hurt myself falling. But now I
      am well. I can go alone, thank you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      His hand was still extended.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, my photographs!&rdquo; she exclaimed suddenly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What photographs?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I bought some photographs at Alinari&rsquo;s. I must have dropped them out
      there in the square.&rdquo; She looked at him cautiously. &ldquo;Would you add to your
      kindness by fetching them?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He added to his kindness. As soon as he had turned his back, Lucy arose
      with the running of a maniac and stole down the arcade towards the Arno.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Honeychurch!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She stopped with her hand on her heart.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You sit still; you aren&rsquo;t fit to go home alone.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I am, thank you so very much.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, you aren&rsquo;t. You&rsquo;d go openly if you were.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I had rather&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then I don&rsquo;t fetch your photographs.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I had rather be alone.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He said imperiously: &ldquo;The man is dead&mdash;the man is probably dead; sit
      down till you are rested.&rdquo; She was bewildered, and obeyed him. &ldquo;And don&rsquo;t
      move till I come back.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      In the distance she saw creatures with black hoods, such as appear in
      dreams. The palace tower had lost the reflection of the declining day, and
      joined itself to earth. How should she talk to Mr. Emerson when he
      returned from the shadowy square? Again the thought occurred to her, &ldquo;Oh,
      what have I done?&rdquo;&mdash;the thought that she, as well as the dying man,
      had crossed some spiritual boundary.
    </p>
    <p>
      He returned, and she talked of the murder. Oddly enough, it was an easy
      topic. She spoke of the Italian character; she became almost garrulous
      over the incident that had made her faint five minutes before. Being
      strong physically, she soon overcame the horror of blood. She rose without
      his assistance, and though wings seemed to flutter inside her, she walked
      firmly enough towards the Arno. There a cabman signalled to them; they
      refused him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And the murderer tried to kiss him, you say&mdash;how very odd Italians
      are!&mdash;and gave himself up to the police! Mr. Beebe was saying that
      Italians know everything, but I think they are rather childish. When my
      cousin and I were at the Pitti yesterday&mdash;What was that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He had thrown something into the stream.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What did you throw in?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Things I didn&rsquo;t want,&rdquo; he said crossly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Emerson!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where are the photographs?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He was silent.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I believe it was my photographs that you threw away.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t know what to do with them,&rdquo; he cried, and his voice was that of
      an anxious boy. Her heart warmed towards him for the first time. &ldquo;They
      were covered with blood. There! I&rsquo;m glad I&rsquo;ve told you; and all the time
      we were making conversation I was wondering what to do with them.&rdquo; He
      pointed down-stream. &ldquo;They&rsquo;ve gone.&rdquo; The river swirled under the bridge,
      &ldquo;I did mind them so, and one is so foolish, it seemed better that they
      should go out to the sea&mdash;I don&rsquo;t know; I may just mean that they
      frightened me.&rdquo; Then the boy verged into a man. &ldquo;For something tremendous
      has happened; I must face it without getting muddled. It isn&rsquo;t exactly
      that a man has died.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Something warned Lucy that she must stop him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It has happened,&rdquo; he repeated, &ldquo;and I mean to find out what it is.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Emerson&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He turned towards her frowning, as if she had disturbed him in some
      abstract quest.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want to ask you something before we go in.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They were close to their pension. She stopped and leant her elbows against
      the parapet of the embankment. He did likewise. There is at times a magic
      in identity of position; it is one of the things that have suggested to us
      eternal comradeship. She moved her elbows before saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have behaved ridiculously.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He was following his own thoughts.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I was never so much ashamed of myself in my life; I cannot think what
      came over me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I nearly fainted myself,&rdquo; he said; but she felt that her attitude
      repelled him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I owe you a thousand apologies.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, all right.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And&mdash;this is the real point&mdash;you know how silly people are
      gossiping&mdash;ladies especially, I am afraid&mdash;you understand what I
      mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m afraid I don&rsquo;t.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I mean, would you not mention it to any one, my foolish behaviour?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your behaviour? Oh, yes, all right&mdash;all right.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Thank you so much. And would you&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She could not carry her request any further. The river was rushing below
      them, almost black in the advancing night. He had thrown her photographs
      into it, and then he had told her the reason. It struck her that it was
      hopeless to look for chivalry in such a man. He would do her no harm by
      idle gossip; he was trustworthy, intelligent, and even kind; he might even
      have a high opinion of her. But he lacked chivalry; his thoughts, like his
      behaviour, would not be modified by awe. It was useless to say to him,
      &ldquo;And would you&mdash;&rdquo; and hope that he would complete the sentence for
      himself, averting his eyes from her nakedness like the knight in that
      beautiful picture. She had been in his arms, and he remembered it, just as
      he remembered the blood on the photographs that she had bought in
      Alinari&rsquo;s shop. It was not exactly that a man had died; something had
      happened to the living: they had come to a situation where character
      tells, and where childhood enters upon the branching paths of Youth.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, thank you so much,&rdquo; she repeated, &ldquo;How quickly these accidents do
      happen, and then one returns to the old life!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Anxiety moved her to question him.
    </p>
    <p>
      His answer was puzzling: &ldquo;I shall probably want to live.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But why, Mr. Emerson? What do you mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I shall want to live, I say.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Leaning her elbows on the parapet, she contemplated the River Arno, whose
      roar was suggesting some unexpected melody to her ears.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
