<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1: The Bertolini</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1-1" epub:type="chapter">
   <h3 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span><span epub:type="subtitle">The Bertolini</span></h3>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Signora had no business to do it,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, &ldquo;no business
      at all. She promised us south rooms with a view close together, instead of
      which here are north rooms, looking into a courtyard, and a long way
      apart. Oh, Lucy!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And a Cockney, besides!&rdquo; said Lucy, who had been further saddened by the
      Signora&rsquo;s unexpected accent. &ldquo;It might be London.&rdquo; She looked at the two
      rows of English people who were sitting at the table; at the row of white
      bottles of water and red bottles of wine that ran between the English
      people; at the portraits of the late Queen and the late Poet Laureate that
      hung behind the English people, heavily framed; at the notice of the
      English church (Rev. Cuthbert Eager, M. A. Oxon.), that was the only other
      decoration of the wall. &ldquo;Charlotte, don&rsquo;t you feel, too, that we might be
      in London? I can hardly believe that all kinds of other things are just
      outside. I suppose it is one&rsquo;s being so tired.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This meat has surely been used for soup,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, laying down
      her fork.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want so to see the Arno. The rooms the Signora promised us in her
      letter would have looked over the Arno. The Signora had no business to do
      it at all. Oh, it is a shame!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Any nook does for me,&rdquo; Miss Bartlett continued; &ldquo;but it does seem hard
      that you shouldn&rsquo;t have a view.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy felt that she had been selfish. &ldquo;Charlotte, you mustn&rsquo;t spoil me: of
      course, you must look over the Arno, too. I meant that. The first vacant
      room in the front&mdash;&rdquo; &ldquo;You must have it,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, part of
      whose travelling expenses were paid by Lucy&rsquo;s mother&mdash;a piece of
      generosity to which she made many a tactful allusion.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, no. You must have it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I insist on it. Your mother would never forgive me, Lucy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She would never forgive me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The ladies&rsquo; voices grew animated, and&mdash;if the sad truth be owned&mdash;a
      little peevish. They were tired, and under the guise of unselfishness they
      wrangled. Some of their neighbours interchanged glances, and one of them&mdash;one
      of the ill-bred people whom one does meet abroad&mdash;leant forward over
      the table and actually intruded into their argument. He said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have a view, I have a view.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett was startled. Generally at a pension people looked them over
      for a day or two before speaking, and often did not find out that they
      would &ldquo;do&rdquo; till they had gone. She knew that the intruder was ill-bred,
      even before she glanced at him. He was an old man, of heavy build, with a
      fair, shaven face and large eyes. There was something childish in those
      eyes, though it was not the childishness of senility. What exactly it was
      Miss Bartlett did not stop to consider, for her glance passed on to his
      clothes. These did not attract her. He was probably trying to become
      acquainted with them before they got into the swim. So she assumed a dazed
      expression when he spoke to her, and then said: &ldquo;A view? Oh, a view! How
      delightful a view is!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This is my son,&rdquo; said the old man; &ldquo;his name&rsquo;s George. He has a view
      too.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, repressing Lucy, who was about to speak.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What I mean,&rdquo; he continued, &ldquo;is that you can have our rooms, and we&rsquo;ll
      have yours. We&rsquo;ll change.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The better class of tourist was shocked at this, and sympathized with the
      new-comers. Miss Bartlett, in reply, opened her mouth as little as
      possible, and said &ldquo;Thank you very much indeed; that is out of the
      question.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why?&rdquo; said the old man, with both fists on the table.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because it is quite out of the question, thank you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You see, we don&rsquo;t like to take&mdash;&rdquo; began Lucy. Her cousin again
      repressed her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But why?&rdquo; he persisted. &ldquo;Women like looking at a view; men don&rsquo;t.&rdquo; And he
      thumped with his fists like a naughty child, and turned to his son,
      saying, &ldquo;George, persuade them!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s so obvious they should have the rooms,&rdquo; said the son. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s
      nothing else to say.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He did not look at the ladies as he spoke, but his voice was perplexed and
      sorrowful. Lucy, too, was perplexed; but she saw that they were in for
      what is known as &ldquo;quite a scene,&rdquo; and she had an odd feeling that whenever
      these ill-bred tourists spoke the contest widened and deepened till it
      dealt, not with rooms and views, but with&mdash;well, with something quite
      different, whose existence she had not realized before. Now the old man
      attacked Miss Bartlett almost violently: Why should she not change? What
      possible objection had she? They would clear out in half an hour.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett, though skilled in the delicacies of conversation, was
      powerless in the presence of brutality. It was impossible to snub any one
      so gross. Her face reddened with displeasure. She looked around as much as
      to say, &ldquo;Are you all like this?&rdquo; And two little old ladies, who were
      sitting further up the table, with shawls hanging over the backs of the
      chairs, looked back, clearly indicating &ldquo;We are not; we are genteel.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eat your dinner, dear,&rdquo; she said to Lucy, and began to toy again with the
      meat that she had once censured.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy mumbled that those seemed very odd people opposite.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eat your dinner, dear. This pension is a failure. To-morrow we will make
      a change.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Hardly had she announced this fell decision when she reversed it. The
      curtains at the end of the room parted, and revealed a clergyman, stout
      but attractive, who hurried forward to take his place at the table,
      cheerfully apologizing for his lateness. Lucy, who had not yet acquired
      decency, at once rose to her feet, exclaiming: &ldquo;Oh, oh! Why, it&rsquo;s Mr.
      Beebe! Oh, how perfectly lovely! Oh, Charlotte, we must stop now, however
      bad the rooms are. Oh!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett said, with more restraint:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you do, Mr. Beebe? I expect that you have forgotten us: Miss
      Bartlett and Miss Honeychurch, who were at Tunbridge Wells when you helped
      the Vicar of St. Peter&rsquo;s that very cold Easter.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The clergyman, who had the air of one on a holiday, did not remember the
      ladies quite as clearly as they remembered him. But he came forward
      pleasantly enough and accepted the chair into which he was beckoned by
      Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I AM so glad to see you,&rdquo; said the girl, who was in a state of spiritual
      starvation, and would have been glad to see the waiter if her cousin had
      permitted it. &ldquo;Just fancy how small the world is. Summer Street, too,
      makes it so specially funny.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Honeychurch lives in the parish of Summer Street,&rdquo; said Miss
      Bartlett, filling up the gap, &ldquo;and she happened to tell me in the course
      of conversation that you have just accepted the living&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I heard from mother so last week. She didn&rsquo;t know that I knew you at
      Tunbridge Wells; but I wrote back at once, and I said: &lsquo;Mr. Beebe is&mdash;&lsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Quite right,&rdquo; said the clergyman. &ldquo;I move into the Rectory at Summer
      Street next June. I am lucky to be appointed to such a charming
      neighbourhood.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, how glad I am! The name of our house is Windy Corner.&rdquo; Mr. Beebe
      bowed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is mother and me generally, and my brother, though it&rsquo;s not often
      we get him to ch&mdash;&mdash; The church is rather far off, I mean.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lucy, dearest, let Mr. Beebe eat his dinner.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am eating it, thank you, and enjoying it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He preferred to talk to Lucy, whose playing he remembered, rather than to
      Miss Bartlett, who probably remembered his sermons. He asked the girl
      whether she knew Florence well, and was informed at some length that she
      had never been there before. It is delightful to advise a newcomer, and he
      was first in the field. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t neglect the country round,&rdquo; his advice
      concluded. &ldquo;The first fine afternoon drive up to Fiesole, and round by
      Settignano, or something of that sort.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No!&rdquo; cried a voice from the top of the table. &ldquo;Mr. Beebe, you are wrong.
      The first fine afternoon your ladies must go to Prato.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That lady looks so clever,&rdquo; whispered Miss Bartlett to her cousin. &ldquo;We
      are in luck.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And, indeed, a perfect torrent of information burst on them. People told
      them what to see, when to see it, how to stop the electric trams, how to
      get rid of the beggars, how much to give for a vellum blotter, how much
      the place would grow upon them. The Pension Bertolini had decided, almost
      enthusiastically, that they would do. Whichever way they looked, kind
      ladies smiled and shouted at them. And above all rose the voice of the
      clever lady, crying: &ldquo;Prato! They must go to Prato. That place is too
      sweetly squalid for words. I love it; I revel in shaking off the trammels
      of respectability, as you know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The young man named George glanced at the clever lady, and then returned
      moodily to his plate. Obviously he and his father did not do. Lucy, in the
      midst of her success, found time to wish they did. It gave her no extra
      pleasure that any one should be left in the cold; and when she rose to go,
      she turned back and gave the two outsiders a nervous little bow.
    </p>
    <p>
      The father did not see it; the son acknowledged it, not by another bow,
      but by raising his eyebrows and smiling; he seemed to be smiling across
      something.
    </p>
    <p>
      She hastened after her cousin, who had already disappeared through the
      curtains&mdash;curtains which smote one in the face, and seemed heavy with
      more than cloth. Beyond them stood the unreliable Signora, bowing
      good-evening to her guests, and supported by &lsquo;Enery, her little boy, and
      Victorier, her daughter. It made a curious little scene, this attempt of
      the Cockney to convey the grace and geniality of the South. And even more
      curious was the drawing-room, which attempted to rival the solid comfort
      of a Bloomsbury boarding-house. Was this really Italy?
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett was already seated on a tightly stuffed arm-chair, which had
      the colour and the contours of a tomato. She was talking to Mr. Beebe, and
      as she spoke, her long narrow head drove backwards and forwards, slowly,
      regularly, as though she were demolishing some invisible obstacle. &ldquo;We are
      most grateful to you,&rdquo; she was saying. &ldquo;The first evening means so much.
      When you arrived we were in for a peculiarly mauvais quart d&rsquo;heure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He expressed his regret.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you, by any chance, know the name of an old man who sat opposite us at
      dinner?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Emerson.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is he a friend of yours?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We are friendly&mdash;as one is in pensions.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then I will say no more.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He pressed her very slightly, and she said more.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am, as it were,&rdquo; she concluded, &ldquo;the chaperon of my young cousin, Lucy,
      and it would be a serious thing if I put her under an obligation to people
      of whom we know nothing. His manner was somewhat unfortunate. I hope I
      acted for the best.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You acted very naturally,&rdquo; said he. He seemed thoughtful, and after a few
      moments added: &ldquo;All the same, I don&rsquo;t think much harm would have come of
      accepting.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No harm, of course. But we could not be under an obligation.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He is rather a peculiar man.&rdquo; Again he hesitated, and then said gently:
      &ldquo;I think he would not take advantage of your acceptance, nor expect you to
      show gratitude. He has the merit&mdash;if it is one&mdash;of saying
      exactly what he means. He has rooms he does not value, and he thinks you
      would value them. He no more thought of putting you under an obligation
      than he thought of being polite. It is so difficult&mdash;at least, I find
      it difficult&mdash;to understand people who speak the truth.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy was pleased, and said: &ldquo;I was hoping that he was nice; I do so always
      hope that people will be nice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think he is; nice and tiresome. I differ from him on almost every point
      of any importance, and so, I expect&mdash;I may say I hope&mdash;you will
      differ. But his is a type one disagrees with rather than deplores. When he
      first came here he not unnaturally put people&rsquo;s backs up. He has no tact
      and no manners&mdash;I don&rsquo;t mean by that that he has bad manners&mdash;and
      he will not keep his opinions to himself. We nearly complained about him
      to our depressing Signora, but I am glad to say we thought better of it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Am I to conclude,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, &ldquo;that he is a Socialist?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe accepted the convenient word, not without a slight twitching of
      the lips.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And presumably he has brought up his son to be a Socialist, too?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hardly know George, for he hasn&rsquo;t learnt to talk yet. He seems a nice
      creature, and I think he has brains. Of course, he has all his father&rsquo;s
      mannerisms, and it is quite possible that he, too, may be a Socialist.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, you relieve me,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett. &ldquo;So you think I ought to have
      accepted their offer? You feel I have been narrow-minded and suspicious?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not at all,&rdquo; he answered; &ldquo;I never suggested that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But ought I not to apologize, at all events, for my apparent rudeness?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He replied, with some irritation, that it would be quite unnecessary, and
      got up from his seat to go to the smoking-room.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Was I a bore?&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, as soon as he had disappeared. &ldquo;Why
      didn&rsquo;t you talk, Lucy? He prefers young people, I&rsquo;m sure. I do hope I
      haven&rsquo;t monopolized him. I hoped you would have him all the evening, as
      well as all dinner-time.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He is nice,&rdquo; exclaimed Lucy. &ldquo;Just what I remember. He seems to see good
      in everyone. No one would take him for a clergyman.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear Lucia&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, you know what I mean. And you know how clergymen generally laugh;
      Mr. Beebe laughs just like an ordinary man.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Funny girl! How you do remind me of your mother. I wonder if she will
      approve of Mr. Beebe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure she will; and so will Freddy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think everyone at Windy Corner will approve; it is the fashionable
      world. I am used to Tunbridge Wells, where we are all hopelessly behind
      the times.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; said Lucy despondently.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a haze of disapproval in the air, but whether the disapproval
      was of herself, or of Mr. Beebe, or of the fashionable world at Windy
      Corner, or of the narrow world at Tunbridge Wells, she could not
      determine. She tried to locate it, but as usual she blundered. Miss
      Bartlett sedulously denied disapproving of any one, and added &ldquo;I am afraid
      you are finding me a very depressing companion.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And the girl again thought: &ldquo;I must have been selfish or unkind; I must be
      more careful. It is so dreadful for Charlotte, being poor.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Fortunately one of the little old ladies, who for some time had been
      smiling very benignly, now approached and asked if she might be allowed to
      sit where Mr. Beebe had sat. Permission granted, she began to chatter
      gently about Italy, the plunge it had been to come there, the gratifying
      success of the plunge, the improvement in her sister&rsquo;s health, the
      necessity of closing the bed-room windows at night, and of thoroughly
      emptying the water-bottles in the morning. She handled her subjects
      agreeably, and they were, perhaps, more worthy of attention than the high
      discourse upon Guelfs and Ghibellines which was proceeding tempestuously
      at the other end of the room. It was a real catastrophe, not a mere
      episode, that evening of hers at Venice, when she had found in her bedroom
      something that is one worse than a flea, though one better than something
      else.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But here you are as safe as in England. Signora Bertolini is so English.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yet our rooms smell,&rdquo; said poor Lucy. &ldquo;We dread going to bed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, then you look into the court.&rdquo; She sighed. &ldquo;If only Mr. Emerson was
      more tactful! We were so sorry for you at dinner.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think he was meaning to be kind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Undoubtedly he was,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Beebe has just been scolding me for my suspicious nature. Of course,
      I was holding back on my cousin&rsquo;s account.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course,&rdquo; said the little old lady; and they murmured that one could
      not be too careful with a young girl.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lucy tried to look demure, but could not help feeling a great fool. No one
      was careful with her at home; or, at all events, she had not noticed it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;About old Mr. Emerson&mdash;I hardly know. No, he is not tactful; yet,
      have you ever noticed that there are people who do things which are most
      indelicate, and yet at the same time&mdash;beautiful?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Beautiful?&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, puzzled at the word. &ldquo;Are not beauty and
      delicacy the same?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So one would have thought,&rdquo; said the other helplessly. &ldquo;But things are so
      difficult, I sometimes think.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She proceeded no further into things, for Mr. Beebe reappeared, looking
      extremely pleasant.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Bartlett,&rdquo; he cried, &ldquo;it&rsquo;s all right about the rooms. I&rsquo;m so glad.
      Mr. Emerson was talking about it in the smoking-room, and knowing what I
      did, I encouraged him to make the offer again. He has let me come and ask
      you. He would be so pleased.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Charlotte,&rdquo; cried Lucy to her cousin, &ldquo;we must have the rooms now.
      The old man is just as nice and kind as he can be.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett was silent.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I fear,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe, after a pause, &ldquo;that I have been officious. I
      must apologize for my interference.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Gravely displeased, he turned to go. Not till then did Miss Bartlett
      reply: &ldquo;My own wishes, dearest Lucy, are unimportant in comparison with
      yours. It would be hard indeed if I stopped you doing as you liked at
      Florence, when I am only here through your kindness. If you wish me to
      turn these gentlemen out of their rooms, I will do it. Would you then, Mr.
      Beebe, kindly tell Mr. Emerson that I accept his kind offer, and then
      conduct him to me, in order that I may thank him personally?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She raised her voice as she spoke; it was heard all over the drawing-room,
      and silenced the Guelfs and the Ghibellines. The clergyman, inwardly
      cursing the female sex, bowed, and departed with her message.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Remember, Lucy, I alone am implicated in this. I do not wish the
      acceptance to come from you. Grant me that, at all events.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Beebe was back, saying rather nervously:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Emerson is engaged, but here is his son instead.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The young man gazed down on the three ladies, who felt seated on the
      floor, so low were their chairs.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My father,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;is in his bath, so you cannot thank him personally.
      But any message given by you to me will be given by me to him as soon as
      he comes out.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett was unequal to the bath. All her barbed civilities came
      forth wrong end first. Young Mr. Emerson scored a notable triumph to the
      delight of Mr. Beebe and to the secret delight of Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Poor young man!&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, as soon as he had gone.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How angry he is with his father about the rooms! It is all he can do to
      keep polite.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In half an hour or so your rooms will be ready,&rdquo; said Mr. Beebe. Then
      looking rather thoughtfully at the two cousins, he retired to his own
      rooms, to write up his philosophic diary.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, dear!&rdquo; breathed the little old lady, and shuddered as if all the
      winds of heaven had entered the apartment. &ldquo;Gentlemen sometimes do not
      realize&mdash;&rdquo; Her voice faded away, but Miss Bartlett seemed to
      understand and a conversation developed, in which gentlemen who did not
      thoroughly realize played a principal part. Lucy, not realizing either,
      was reduced to literature. Taking up Baedeker&rsquo;s Handbook to Northern
      Italy, she committed to memory the most important dates of Florentine
      History. For she was determined to enjoy herself on the morrow. Thus the
      half-hour crept profitably away, and at last Miss Bartlett rose with a
      sigh, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think one might venture now. No, Lucy, do not stir. I will superintend
      the move.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How you do do everything,&rdquo; said Lucy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Naturally, dear. It is my affair.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I would like to help you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, dear.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Charlotte&rsquo;s energy! And her unselfishness! She had been thus all her life,
      but really, on this Italian tour, she was surpassing herself. So Lucy
      felt, or strove to feel. And yet&mdash;there was a rebellious spirit in
      her which wondered whether the acceptance might not have been less
      delicate and more beautiful. At all events, she entered her own room
      without any feeling of joy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want to explain,&rdquo; said Miss Bartlett, &ldquo;why it is that I have taken the
      largest room. Naturally, of course, I should have given it to you; but I
      happen to know that it belongs to the young man, and I was sure your
      mother would not like it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Lucy was bewildered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you are to accept a favour it is more suitable you should be under an
      obligation to his father than to him. I am a woman of the world, in my
      small way, and I know where things lead to. However, Mr. Beebe is a
      guarantee of a sort that they will not presume on this.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mother wouldn&rsquo;t mind I&rsquo;m sure,&rdquo; said Lucy, but again had the sense of
      larger and unsuspected issues.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett only sighed, and enveloped her in a protecting embrace as
      she wished her good-night. It gave Lucy the sensation of a fog, and when
      she reached her own room she opened the window and breathed the clean
      night air, thinking of the kind old man who had enabled her to see the
      lights dancing in the Arno and the cypresses of San Miniato, and the
      foot-hills of the Apennines, black against the rising moon.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss Bartlett, in her room, fastened the window-shutters and locked the
      door, and then made a tour of the apartment to see where the cupboards
      led, and whether there were any oubliettes or secret entrances. It was
      then that she saw, pinned up over the washstand, a sheet of paper on which
      was scrawled an enormous note of interrogation. Nothing more.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What does it mean?&rdquo; she thought, and she examined it carefully by the
      light of a candle. Meaningless at first, it gradually became menacing,
      obnoxious, portentous with evil. She was seized with an impulse to destroy
      it, but fortunately remembered that she had no right to do so, since it
      must be the property of young Mr. Emerson. So she unpinned it carefully,
      and put it between two pieces of blotting-paper to keep it clean for him.
      Then she completed her inspection of the room, sighed heavily according to
      her habit, and went to bed.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
